Liverpool FC training session at Rajamangala National Stadium before their first match of the 2015 Pre Season Tour in Bangkok against Thailand All Stars

Liverpool FC training session at Rajamangala National Stadium before their first match of the 2015 Pre Season Tour in Bangkok against Thailand All Stars

Get the biggest Liverpool FC stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

The Liverpool squad were put through their paces in the searing heat of Bangkok as they prepare for Tuesday’s opening tour friendly against the Thai All Stars.

Brendan Rodgers led the evening training session at the Rajamangala Stadium in front of around 1,000 supporters with the temperature around 32 degrees and 65% humidity.

Rodgers was assisted by backroom duo Sean O’Driscoll and Pep Lijnders with new first team coach Gary McAllister not yet on the tour.

McAllister, whose appointment was only officially confirmed on Saturday, will link up with the squad in Brisbane on Wednesday or Thursday.

Watch: James Pearce reports from Bangkok

Video Loading Video Unavailable Click to play Tap to play The video will start in 8 Cancel Play now

Despite the pitch cutting up badly, all the players came through unscathed. Rodgers is expected to use most of his squad in the opening friendly with no-one expected to play more than 45 minutes as the Reds build up fitness levels.

“We had a great time in Thailand last time and it’s been a good start to this trip,” Rodgers said.

“Two years ago our visit here provided us with a wonderful foundation for a good league campaign and we hope it will be similar this time. We’re expecting a tough game.”

Midfielder Lucas Leiva added: “It’s been a long trip but we’re really looking forward to the game tomorrow.

“We want to get some speed into our game and give the fans a good game.

“With the weather it will be hard for us as it’s difficult to play here but it will benefit us going forward.”

Rodgers: There's been no rift with Raheem Sterling