A Taxpayer-Funded Brooklyn Principal Is Under Investigation For Promoting Revolutionary Communism

Eric Owens

Education Editor

The New York City Department of Education is investigating a taxpayer-funded secondary school principal in Brooklyn for allegedly promoting communism and recruiting students for radical political causes.

The principal, Jill Bloomberg of Park Slope Collegiate, has responded by filing a federal lawsuit seeking to stop the investigation, reports New York public radio station WNYC.

The New York City education department initiated its investigation into Bloomberg’s alleged communist and communist-recruitment activities based on a tip from someone who remains anonymous.

The tipster told officials that Bloomberg is affiliated with the Progressive Labor Party, a revolutionary communist political party based in Brooklyn.

Court documents filed by the education department say that the investigation is focused on allegations that Bloomberg has worked to promote the agenda of the Progressive Labor Party by recruiting students “to participate in organizational activities, including marches for her political organization.”

According to the Progressive Labor Party’s website, the group seeks to foment violent revolution. “Only the dictatorship of the working class — communism — can provide a lasting solution to the disaster that is today’s world for billions of people. This cannot be done through electoral politics, but requires a revolutionary movement and a mass Red Army led by PLP.”

Also: “Communism means the Party leads every aspect of society. For this to work, millions of workers — eventually everyone — must become communist organizers. Join Us!” (RELATED: These Mugshots Of Commie Trump Protesters Will Make Your Day)

The Progressive Labor Party “fights to destroy capitalism and the dictatorship of the capitalist class” by organizing “workers, soldiers and youth into a revolutionary movement for communism.”

Court documents filed by New York City’s education department allege that students who disagree with Bloomberg and her comrades “are not allowed to express” their political views.

In addition, the school district says, Bloomberg and her husband used footage of Park Slope Collegiate students and staff in documentary for a Progressive Labor Party-affiliated group “without authorization” from the students or staff members.

The policies of New York City’s school district “prohibit the use of school facilities, equipment and supplies on behalf of political organizations,” according to the education department’s court filing.

Bloomberg’s lawsuit concerning the investigation — filed Friday — contends that the investigation into her alleged communist activities is retaliation because she opposes racism and has criticized the New York City Board of Education for, she says, practices that amount to segregation.

Earlier this year, Bloomberg charged the education department with discrimination because, she said, a school with many white students received more sports equipment than Park Slope Collegiate did. The students at Park Slope Collegiate are primarily black and Latino.

Supporters of Bloomberg packed a Lower Manhattan courtroom for a hearing related to Bloomberg’s lawsuit. Many of them all wore the same t-shirts.

After the hearing, Bloomberg and her supporters spoke.

“What speech is prohibited?” Bloomberg asked, according to Chalkbeat, an education news outlet.

“The speech I am most known for is anti-racism,” the principal also said.

Bloomberg’s supporters recited her message in remarkably similar fashion.

A Park Slope Collegiate eighth grader named Maya showed up at the court proceedings to declare that Bloomberg only wants to fight against racism.

“It’s just upsetting that she’s being accused of stating her own political views when she’s just stating the facts that racism is here,” Maya informed Chalkbeat.

A special education teacher, Sarah Vega, swore that Bloomberg never tries to indoctrinate students with revolutionary communist propaganda.

“I’ve worked for her for over a decade,” Vega told Chalkbeat. “I’ve never seen her furthering any political agenda whatsoever. She fights against racism, but I don’t really consider that partisan politics.”

Bloomberg has indicated that she does not belong to the Progressive Labor Party.

This week, a federal judge is expected to decide whether to allow the investigation by school officials to proceed.

Read more: http://dailycaller.com/2017/05/03/a-taxpayer-funded-brooklyn-principal-is-under-investigation-for-promoting-revolutionary-communism/

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.









Share this: Facebook

Twitter

LinkedIn

Reddit

Pinterest

Tumblr

WhatsApp

Telegram

Pocket



Like this: Like Loading...

Related

Comments

comments