Nintendo Switch Surprise Australian Launch Line-Up – 9 Unannounced Games

The Nintendo Switch launch games in Australia aren’t what the locals expected.

The Nintendo Switch launched at midnight in Australia, with lucky fans already well and truly deep into games like The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild. It is the big system seller of the launch window, and what we’ve played thus far has been truly incredible - a fantastic gaming experience and a must-own. You can read more about it in the Nintendo Switch Magazine. It is not alone at launch, of course. In all 12 games were set to launch alongside the Switch, the lowest in 21 years. However, when Australians opened up the eShop for the first time, they weren’t greeted with the list of titles they expected.

The announced launch-line-up was:

1. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild

2. Super Bomberman R

3. 1-2 Switch

4. Shovel Knight: Specter of Torment/Treasure Trove

5. Just Dance 2017

6. FAST RMX

7. Snipperclips – Cut It Out Together

8. I am Setsuna

9. World of Goo

10. Little Inferno

11. Human Resources Machine

12. Skylanders: Imaginators

The actual line-up is:

1. The Legend of Zelda: Breath of the Wild

2. Super Bomberman R

3. 1-2 Switch

4. The King of Fighters ’89

5. Waku Waku 7

6. Shock Troopers

7. World Heroes Perfect

8. Metal Slug 3

9. Shovel Knight: Specter of Torment/Treasure Trove

10. New Frontier Days: Founding Pioneers

11. Othello

12. Voez

13. Vroom in the Night Sky

14. Just Dance 2017

15. FAST RMX

16. Snipperclips – Cut It Out Together

17. I am Setsuna

So we have an additional nine games we didn’t know where coming to Australia, and four games that are missing. It’s typical of the confusion surrounding the launch of this system, but more games is hardly a deal breaker. Especially given the big guns are still there.

What is the Nintendo Switch magazine?

If you want to learn more about the launch of the Switch, with exclusive reviews of the console, accessories, online service and 24 games, get the Nintendo Switch Magazine. Go direct to Amazon or iTunes if you prefer.

New comment

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus