Editor's Note: This has been cross-posted from the EnergyBlog at Energy.gov

As many of us hit the road to celebrate America's independence this upcoming 4th of July weekend, we must once again confront the reality of our country's economy, environment and security dependence on foreign oil.



On Wednesday, June 29th, at 2:00 pm ET, please join Dr. Arun Majumdar at Energy.gov for a frank, two-way discussion about the investments the federal government is making in innovative research and technology today that will move us off of foreign oil and toward the clean energy infrastructure of the future.

Watch the video invitation to the online chat with Dr. Arun Majumdar here.

The Energy Department is making critical investments to improve the technology and ramp-up the development and manufacturing of renewable energy sources, such as advanced biofuels, solar, wind and hydro power.



And as the first director of the Advanced Research Projects Agency for Energy (ARPA-E), Dr. Majumdar oversees the Department of Energy's investments in high-risk, high-reward projects -- such as work to invent better batteries for electric vehicles, create smarter electric grid infrastructure, explore energy-efficient cooling of buildings, find new ways to create liquid fuels using microorganisms, and many more projects to accelerate the development and deployment of key energy technologies.



You can submit your questions about new energy innovations to Dr. Majumdar in advance of the event through email, Twitter or Facebook, by

Sending an email to newmedia@hq.doe.gov;

Tweeting your question to @energy with the hashtag #energymatters; or

Leaving a question for Dr. Majumdar at http://www.facebook.com/energygov.

You’ll also be able to send him questions live during the event using the above methods, or by visiting energy.gov.



As Dr. Arun Majumdar says in his video, like past American generations have already done, this is our turn to change the world. We hope to see you online on Energy.gov on Wednesday the 29th at 2pm ET to discuss how.

