It’s been a while since I last took part in the Peanut Butter Bash Group but its time to join in again! Because of my job I have had to sit the last few months out but this is fate because the month I could join in again was banana month……. seriously anyone who has read this blog for a while will know just how obsessed with all things banana I am, so I could’t wait to try these two together. And I came up with this Light and Fluffy Peanut Butter Banana Layer Cake.















This is everything a cake should be and oh so much more, let me explain 😀

Layer Cake’s & Banana

I don’t often make layer cakes, I find them too much to eat and can occasionally be just a little bit too dry for my liking. Hence why I tend to make traybake’s, snack cakes and cupcakes. It’s just a personal preference of mine. But I got it into my head that I wanted a layer cake. Banana cake is almost always a moist cake but it can make a sponge dense and heavy.















To make sure there were no dense heavy sponge issues with this cake I added buttermilk to the batter. Buttermilk is almost a wonder ingredient in cakes. It ensures a light and fluffy tender crumb. Ensuring the banana did not weigh the sponge down.

Peanut Butter Overload

Because banana can be a strong flavour I wanted to make sure the peanut butter was an equal partner and not a side show. To do this I included a healthy amount into the cake batter, I also smothered the cake in a light and creamy peanut butter cream cheese frosting and to finish if off I added a handful of peanut butter chips.















Making sure that each bite had that peanut butter goodness in it 😀 The peanut butter chips are completely optional as I know they are not the easiest thing to come by, especially in the UK. I have to order mine online, so chocolate chips will work fine instead.















Or leave them off all together. All in all this a light and fluffy cake that is equally flavoured with banana and peanut butter. It’s simple to make and comes together in one bowl so there aren’t too many dishes to wash up afterwards 😀















Honestly you will love this Light and Fluffy Peanut Butter Banana Layer Cake as much as me. It really is a tea time treat for the whole family!



























Light and Fluffy Peanut Butter Banana Layer Cake A light and fluffy peanut butter and banana layer cake. Peanut butter and banana sponge filled and covered with a light and creamy peanut butter cream cheese frosting. 0 from 0 votes Print Pin Prep Time: 20 minutes Cook Time: 35 minutes Total Time: 55 minutes Servings: 8 -10 slices Author: Emma Ingredients For the cake

125 grams unsalted butter (1 stick & 1 tablespoon)

250 grams light brown sugar (1 & 1/8 cup)

125 grams smooth peanut butter (1/2 cup)

2 large eggs

1 teaspoon vanilla extract

2 medium sized ripe bananas - mashed

120 millilitres buttermilk (1/2 cup)

1 teaspoon baking soda

1 teaspoon baking powder

1/2 teaspoon salt

290 grams plain / all purpose flour (2 & 1/4 cups)

For the frosting

212 grams unsalted butter (1 cup)

65 grams smooth peanut butter (1/4 cup)

400 grams icing sugar (3 cups)

155 grams full fat cream cheese (3/4 cup)

50 grams peanut butter or chocolate chips (1/4 cup) Instructions Preheat your oven to 190C / 375F / Gas mark 5 and either line or lightly grease two 8inch round tins that are at least 2 inches deep and place to one side.

Cream the butter, sugar and peanut butter together until they are light and fluffy. About 2-3 minutes if you are using a stand or electric mixer.

Then add the eggs one at a time beating in-between each addition then add in the vanilla extract and mashed bananas. Mix until everything is well combined about another minute.

Sieve in the baking soda, baking powder, salt and flour.

Then gently fold in the dry ingredients into the batter.

Divide the batter equally between the two tins and gently spread it out in the tin so it is level. Then pop the tins in the middle of your oven.

After 25 minutes you need to reduce the temperature of your oven to 170C / 325F / Gas mark 3 and bake your cake for a further 10 minutes.

After this 10 minutes check you cake for doneness, it should just be starting to pull away from the sides of your tins be a light golden colour and be firm to the touch. If you have a pick press it into the middle and it should come out clean. If it doesn't pass these tests give your cake a further few minutes and test again.

Take the cakes out of the oven and let them rest in their tins for 5 minutes then transfer them to a wire rack to fully cool down.

Once the cakes are fully cooled down its time to make the frosting.

Using an electric mixer or stand mixer beat the butter until it is light and fluffy, this will be about 5-7 minutes.

Mix in the peanut butter and beat for another minute or two until it is well mixed into the butter.

Turn your mixer off and pour in half of the icing sugar, on a low speed start to mix it in. When its fully combined repeat with the remaining icing sugar.

Add in the cream cheese and beat on a medium speed for a minute until it is well mixed in.

Your cake is now ready to decorate.

Put half of your frosting on top of one of your cakes and gently spread it out over the sponge but keep it a few centimetres from the edges and then sandwich it together with the other half.

Then place the remaining frosting on the top of the cakes and gently work in over the top and down the side of the sponges until everything is fully covered.

If using sprinkle your peanut butter chips or chocolate chips over the top.

Slice and serve.

Kept in an airtight tin in cool temperatures this cake will last 4 days. Tried this recipe? Mention @BakeThenEat or tag #BakeThenEat Share this recipe Mention @BakeThenEat or tag #BakeThenEat















Do you want to join in on the peanut butter bash fun? If so, email Miranda and request to join the Peanut Butter Bash facebook group! The first Thursday of each month we post a dessert with peanut butter and a mystery ingredient. There is also a Facebook group if you want to join in the fun but don’t run your own blog The Peanut Butter Recipe Box. Here are the other peanut butter and Banana creations!



