Saturday December 12, 2015

East Carolina: Duke offensive coordinator Scottie Montgomery will be the next head coach at ECU, per Bruce Feldman.

East Carolina: Brady Hoke and Everett Withers were widely reported to be interviewing again today and we mentioned that there were whispers of a third potential candidate. We hear that Duke offensive coordinator Scottie Montgomery is still be involved in the process.

Hanover College (D-III – IN): Franklin College offensive coordinator Matt Theobald has been named head coach at his alma mater.

Penn State: Fordham head coach Joe Moorhead will be Penn State’s offensive coordinator according to multiple reports.

Texas: Texas has officially announced Sterlin Gilbert as offensive coordinator/quarterbacks coach and Matt Mattox as offensive line coach/run game coordinator. Gilbert will earn $850,000 per year over a three-year contract; Mattox will make $550,000 a year over his three-year contract. Shawn Watson and Joe Wickline will not have their contracts renewed.

Tulsa: Quality control assistant/assistant offensive line coach Matt Bloesch has been promoted to offensive line coach. The Hurricane’s other open position will be filled after the Dec. 26 Independence Bowl.

Virginia: Bronco Mendenhall has added Ruffin McNeill as assistant head coach / inside linebackers. To recap, UVA retained Marques Hagans as receivers, added Ruffin and is bringing six assistants from BYU: Robert Anae (OC), Mark Atuaia (RBs), Jason Beck (QBs), Garret Tujague (OL), Nick Howell (DC) and Kelly Poppinga (STC).

Oklahoma State: We continue to hear that Gundy will fill Robby Discher’s special teams role in the same capacity. The hire is expected to be a grad assistant, not one of the nine full-time positions.

Georgia: Sources confirmed to us Pitt offensive coordinator Jim Chaney will be the offensive coordinator at Georgia. Sources also now have confirmed Arkansas offensive line coach Sam Pittman will join him at Georgia.

Texas: It took the President of the University, the AD, the head football coach and others to go to Tulsa last night; but UT wound up getting their guys. Sterlin Gilbert is coming as offensive coordinator and Matt Mattox will be the new offensive line coach at UT.

Jackson State (FCS – MS): If Mississippi State’s Tony Hughes can’t get a deal done, sources tell FootballScoop that North Carolina Central head coach Jerry Mack could have further discussions with JSU.