Samsung Releases Galaxy Tab S to Compete with iPad Air?

Samsung has always been focused on building the ultimate experience for smartphone and tablet users. On the day of

2014 World Cup opening ceremony, Samsung also officially released its first flagship tablet - Samsung Galaxy Tab S.

The core technology inside is the Super AMOLED (Active-matrix organic light-emitting diode) instead of traditional LCD(Liquid Crystal Display) that used by most of tablets including iPad Air. With super-high 2560 x 1600 resolution,

Tab S provides straight-up gorgeous display to let HD video look great. Make no mistake: The key selling point of

Samsung Galaxy Tab S is the highest resolution up till now to compete with iPad Air.

Besides its Super AMOLED, what else breakthroughs does Galaxy Tab S produce compared with iPad Air?

Read on, DVDSmith will bring you a full range of comparative analysis.

No matter which one is your preference, Samsung Galaxy Tab S or Apple iPad Air would be a good choice for you to enjoy great entertainment experience. But it makes sense that Galaxy Tab S pays more attention on display (size, resolution, type) and battery life from the above comparison, which provide you with more marvelous visual treat.

Except for downloading videos directly from websites, the vast majority of movie fans usually watch their DVDs which make them feel much better for some reason. Are you interesting in watching your favorite movie DVDs on Samsung Galaxy Tab S? Any DVD Cloner Platinum can help you to do it.

>>Windows Users: Any DVD Cloner Platinum<<

>>Mac Users: Any DVD Cloner Platinum for Mac<<

IMAGE-TEXT Tutorial about Watching DVDs on Samsung Galaxy Tab S with Any DVD Cloner Platinum

Any DVD Cloner Platinum is a powerful combination of DVD cloner and DVD ripper. As a DVD cloner, it provides 4 flexible copying modes to copy, clone or compress DVD to DVD, DVD folder or ISO image with all protections decrypted

and removed. As a DVD ripper, it can rip any DVD to MP4, M4V, AVI, M2TS, HTML5 embedded video, easy to convert encrypted DVDs to videos supported by popular devices likeiPhone 5S/5C iPad, Samsung Smartphone,Android tablet, etc. Only above 2 steps, movie DVD converter can convert all of your favorite DVDs to videos for enjoying on Galaxy Tab S.

Extra Tips:

You might wonder how to transfer DVD movies to your iPhone/ipad/ipod, don't worry, Syncios Free manager has your back. Syncios Free Manager is a powerful iTunes alternative and iOS manager, trusted by millions Apple users. It can help you transfer, backup and restore data between your PC and iPad/iPhone/iPod without using iTunes. Learn More>>

Try the free trial version of Syncios Manager Now!

Related Articles

* How to enjoy movie DVDs on Sony Xperia Z2?

* Sony PlayStation 4 is not only a game cosole, but also a home meida center

* Watching classic movie DVDs on Samsung Galalxy S5 with Any DVD Cloner Platinum