Prep Time: 10-15 minutes

Cook Time: 40 minutes

Pretty patties resting on a bed of oven roasted carrots. Doesn’t that sound delicious?

I guess I’m having a ‘vegetable patties’ period. These are wonderfully soft and crispy at the same time, with a ton of options to spice them up. Since potatoes and cauliflower have a very mild taste, you can play around with herbs and spices.

For about a dozen patties you will need:

4 medium potatoes, peeled and chopped

½ medium cauliflower or whole if it is small, cut into florets

2 tablespoons coconut oil

½ teaspoon salt

¼ teaspoon turmeric

¼ teaspoon ground red paprika

½ teaspoon dried basil (or a few leaves if you have the option of fresh basil, finely chopped)

¼ teaspoon dried oregano (again, use fresh herbs if you have the option, a few leaves will do the trick)

1 cup vegan bread crumbs (You can make your own if you bake bread at home – leave it to dry and process it in your blender/food processor.)

Other options for flavor: garlic, sautéed onions, soy sauce, curry, thyme…

To make:

Cook the potatoes and cauliflower, potatoes need about 15 minutes, cauliflower 10 minutes – I just add the cauliflower 5 minutes later and cook until soft. Strain and mash well, try to break as many lumps as possible. Season with salt and other spices or herbs to your liking and start adding the bread crumbs a few tablespoons at a time. The mixture will be soft but keep its form. Taste and adjust if necessary. Use an ice cream scooper as a measuring tool to make the patties uniform in size and shape. Flatten them into discs and roll in bread crumbs. If you are not using them all just freeze them on a tray lined with baking paper and later when frozen transfer them into a bag to save on space in the freezer. You can fry these in a pan with a bit of coconut oil for 3-4 minutes on each side, but be careful: they soak up a lot of it. You could also bake them in the oven (375 F 15-20 minutes). The bed of carrots on which these heavenly patties rest are just organic carrots washed and sliced, tossed together with some olive oil, salt and thyme. Set on a baking tray lined with baking paper, 15-20 minutes at 375 F.

Bon appetit!