Get the biggest football stories by email Subscribe Thank you for subscribing We have more newsletters Show me See our privacy notice Could not subscribe, try again later Invalid Email

Billionaires Red Bull want to buy a football club in England – and ‘give it wings’ to make it big, writes Alan Nixon in the People.

The Austrian-based energy drinks firm are on the look-out for a suitable club, with Anglophile coach Ralf Rangnick, sporting director of Red Bull Salzburg, heading the search.

As well as current Austrian league leaders Salzburg, Red Bull already owns clubs in Germany, New York, Brazil and Ghana.

The company’s sporting assets also include two Formula One teams: Red Bull Racing and Scuderia Toro Rosso.

Now coach Rangnick, who almost got the Everton job in the summer, has been tasked to find a club in England for their latest move into ownership.

An insider in the deal said: “Red Bull want a team to take into the Champions League. It is the only market they have not reached yet. Ideally this would be in the London area, but both Everton and Liverpool interest them too because it would not take much to get them to that level.

“They have looked at the Championship, but you can spend fortunes there and not make any progress.”

Rangnick, an English-educated German, has a good knowledge of the game and is looking at several options. He would also oversee the ­purchase and running of the club.

News of Red Bull’s interest is spreading rapidly and there should be no lack of willing sellers.

The company’s Formula One success, with Sebastian Vettel taking them towards a fourth straight title, has put them on the map, but buying a club in the ‘home’ of football could be their biggest coup yet.

And taking it into the Champions League is the ultimate aim for one of the biggest sports-backing firms in the business.

Teams which could be lined up

EVERTON Bill Kenwright has been looking for a respectable buyer for his club for years. The fact Ralf Rangnick nearly got the job and knows the club helps. Only snag – Red Bull Everton?!?

LIVERPOOL The American owners have pumped in millions and will want a big return on their investment. Genuine worldwide appeal. Red Bull Liverpool does have a ring.

CRYSTAL PALACE Red Bull would really give the Eagles wings. London, near airports, very appealing. Would not cost much, but needs a big spend. Red Bull Crystal Palace is a mouthful.

WEST HAM Owners who are always open to approaches. New home at the Olympic Stadium makes them appealing too. Red Bull West Ham? Not so crazy.

LEEDS The Yorkshire club has history, a huge fan base and owners who would sell at the drop of a hat. Red Bull Leeds United? Why not?