As the large-scale FBI investigation into corruption in college basketball continues nationwide, Hurricanes coach Jim Larrañaga and his staff are cooperating with authorities looking into the Miami program, Larrañaga’s attorney said late Tuesday night.

Stuart Z. Grossman, a Coral Gables attorney who is representing Larrañaga, told the Sun Sentinel the coach has turned over phone records and other documents to both school and government officials investigating the Hurricanes men’s basketball team.

Their efforts, Grossman says, will help prove that neither Larrañaga nor any member of his coaching staff knew about an alleged payoff being potentially made to a prospect Miami was recruiting.

“We are living up to our pledge to cooperate with the government and with the University of Miami from Coach Larrañaga’s point of view by giving them anything and everything they ask for, whether it’s emails, phone receipts, or any documented records that we have,” Grossman said. “And I think it’s impressive because we don’t play games. We’re very straightforward, and we believe that anyone that objectively looks at this, and we’re convinced they will, will conclude that the University of Miami, Coach Larrañaga and his assistants don’t know a thing about this conversation that took place in which a coach was named as supporting some type of payoff to a high school player.

“I’m not denying that somebody may have mentioned a coach’s name, but I’m absolutely telling you that none of our coaches were involved in that, in the conversation or in attempted bribery or anything like that.”

Federal corruption and bribery charges were filed against 10 people tied to college basketball nationwide last week, including four assistant coaches, Adidas executive Jim Gatto and youth travel basketball coach Jonathan Brad Augustine.

In the Department of Justice complaint filed against Gatto, the DOJ alleges that a “Coach-3” from “University-7” had knowledge of a plan to funnel approximately $150,000 to “Player-12,” an unnamed high school basketball recruit set to graduate in 2018 in order to secure that athlete’s verbal commitment to the “University-7.”

No Miami coaches were named in the complaint or were arrested, but school president Dr. Julio Frenk confirmed last Wednesday that the U.S. Attorney’s Office was investigating a potential tie between a recruit and a member of the coaching staff at UM, which fit the description of the unnamed “University-7” mentioned in the complaint against Gatto.

Grossman said that Larrañaga, like everyone else, learned about the allegations involving the Miami program last Tuesday. And he said the coach has been “devastated” by what has unfolded since.

Grossman said Larrañaga has spoken with his three assistant coaches — Chris Caputo, Adam Fisher and Jamal Brunt — and Grossman said the coach remains confident none of them are involved in the matter.

“First of all, he was devastated because each individual knows what he or she did or does in broad daylight or in the middle of the night,” Grossman said. “Coach L knew he had not participated in anything like this. So his No. 1 concern was his assistants, had any of the three of them betrayed him, because he loves these guys. And that, I think, hurt him the most. He didn’t know anything other than what he read, and he’s satisfied that none of the assistants did anything. They’re like sons to him. And if you know him, that’s the way he is. He is the father of Miami basketball. … Now, we just sit around and wait and cooperate.”

Grossman said he’s uncertain how long the investigation into Miami’s program will go on, but the longer it takes, the greater impact it will have on Miami’s recruiting.

The Hurricanes, who had one of their best recruiting classes in program history a year ago and are projected to be a preseason Top 25 team this season, currently do not have any recruits committed in their 2018 class. And at least one top prospect has reportedly said he is no longer considering the program.

As the investigation continues, so, too does the preparation for the upcoming season. Miami, which was 21-12 last year and advanced to the first round of the NCAA Tournament, opened practice last Friday.

It’s on the court, Grossman said, that Larrañaga and the Hurricanes have found a brief respite from their off-court issues.

“Frankly, that’s their best moment of the day, when they can get on the floor and practice and they’ll forget about — for that period of time — what’s going on,” Grossman said. “It weighs on everybody’s minds. It weighs on the coaches’ minds, I’m sure on the players’ minds, you have to reassure them that everything’s going to be OK and whatnot. The saddest part is Coach works all of his life to build a program on his own reputation and you sell it to recruits and they, of course, do their due diligence … come for a campus visit, check out the coaches, this and that and up until this moment, it’s been just flawless under his leadership. Now, you’ve got this taking place and it’s just highly disruptive to the recruiting process.

“I would just like the folks out there who believe in the truth and believe in the university to hang in there. We’ll get through this. We’re doing all we can to cooperate.”

CAPTION Manny Diaz is introduced as head coach of the Miami Hurricanes and outlines his vision for the program moving forward. Manny Diaz is introduced as head coach of the Miami Hurricanes and outlines his vision for the program moving forward. CAPTION Manny Diaz is introduced as head coach of the Miami Hurricanes and outlines his vision for the program moving forward. Manny Diaz is introduced as head coach of the Miami Hurricanes and outlines his vision for the program moving forward. CAPTION Hurricanes running back DeeJay Dallas discusses some of Miami’s woes. Hurricanes running back DeeJay Dallas discusses some of Miami’s woes. CAPTION Manny Diaz talks Hurricanes defense, Temple job Manny Diaz talks Hurricanes defense, Temple job CAPTION UM’s Ephraim Banda on the changes around UM’s defense. UM’s Ephraim Banda on the changes around UM’s defense. CAPTION Hurricanes coach Mark Richt discusses the end of UM's losing streak ahead of Saturday's regular-season finale against Pittsburgh. Hurricanes coach Mark Richt discusses the end of UM's losing streak ahead of Saturday's regular-season finale against Pittsburgh.

ccabrera@sun-sentinel.com; On Twitter @ChristyChirinos.