KPS Teacher "walk-in"

Kalamazoo Public Schools teachers stood outside school buildings and in their entrances on Wednesday, Feb. 17, to support changes that make standardized testing less cumbersome and more effective. - Courtesy Photos

KALAMAZOO, MI -- Teachers at many of the Kalamazoo Public Schools will participate in a demonstration before class on Thursday.

Members of the Kalamazoo Education Association will participate in a "walk in" at 7 a.m. on Thursday, Oct. 6. Teachers, administrators and staff will gather outside school buildings 30 minutes before the academic day begins, demonstrating with signs to promote the need for more funding and less focus on standardized tests.

Amanda Miller, president of the KEA, said the union's 800 members will all participate in some way in the awareness-raising campaign, coordinated by the group Alliance to Reclaim Our Schools and part of a national effort.

Miller said tests like M-STEP, which are administered in the spring and have results returned in the fall, don't give teachers any way to help students during the school year.

"Teachers love tests if we can get immediate feedback and use it for instruction," Miller said. "If we don't get the results (until the next school year) and we're spending all this time on it, it's (not worth it). Kids need to be doing things that are beneficial instead."

Once the scores do come back, Miller said are being used to punish schools.

"Tests don't take into account of all the other aspects of (a student's) life like poverty," she said.

The online exams are also a drain on resources, requiring technology purchases and staff to deal with technical issues on test day.

The organization supports giving students access to an engaging and rigorous curriculum that does not base their success on high-stakes testing.

Last year about 80 cities participated in the effort. This year, Miller said 200 cities are expected to join the walk-ins, which were moved to October to bring education issues to the forefront during the election cycle.

Parents, students and members of the community are also invited to attend and wear red to show solidarity with the cause. Miller said the walk in concept is a more positive way to demonstrate as opposed to a strike or walk out.

"We appreciate the leadership of our association regarding the important themes of school funding and time for learning and appreciate the opportunity to join others across the country in this consciousness-raising activity," said KPS Superintendent Michael Rice in a statement.

A similar demonstration was coordinated in February. Many teachers carried signs that read: "All our children deserve more time for learning, less time for testing."

For more information, visit reclaimourschools.org.