A federal bankruptcy judge approved Thursday a Chapter 11 reorganization plan that will allow AT&T and DirecTV to purchase Comcast SportsNet Houston and relaunch it in November as Root Sports Houston.

There was no immediate indication, in the wake of Judge Marvin Isgur’s ruling, when the new network will launch with expanded carriage on DirecTV and AT&T U-verse in addition to Comcast.

However, CSN Houston has posted a broadcast schedule through Nov. 9, so the new network is not likely to launch until after that period.

Judge Isgur’s ruling does not mean that the case is concluded. Comcast, in fact, filed notice of appeal late Thursday night, alleging the judge erred on six grounds in his decision.

The appeal likely will be assigned to U.S. District Judge Lynn Hughes.

In its appeal, Comcast says Judge Isgur erred in six areas:

— In confirming the reorganization plan.

— In not allowing Comcast’s secured claim to be accepted for payment over time under section 1111(b) of the bankruptcy code.

— In ruling that the plan met the requirements of section 1129(b) of the bankruptcy code in that it “does not discriminate unfairly, and is fair and equitable, with respect to each class of claims or interests that is impaired under, and has not accepted, the plan.”

— In ruling that the plan had been approved by a valid class of creditors that will not receive full payment of claims.

— In ruling that the plan did not discriminate against a class of creditors that included Comcast entities.

— In holding that the plan legally exculpates or provides protection against liability for the Astros, Rockets, DirecTV, AT&T and members of the CSN Houston but not against Comcast.

Judge Isgur, meanwhile, will preside over another hearing at 2 p.m. Friday as the parties continue to thrash through logistical issues involved in the transition from CSN Houston to Root Sports Houston.

“Everybody can lose a lot of money if you don’t reach an agreement,” the judge said. “There’s a lot at stake.”

Officials with the Rockets and Astros, who supported the reorganization plan, said they were pleased with the judge’s ruling.

“On behalf of Leslie Alexander and our organization and, more than anything, our fans, we are very appreciative of Judge Isgur’s ruling and look forward to getting our games on as quickly as possible,” said Rockets CEO Tad Brown.

“We want to stay focused to make sure that we get the network on the air to the entire market as quickly as possible. There are logistics involved. We’ve got to get with the Root Sports folks, but there is a clear path. We appreciate the judge for that path and it’s a great day for Rockets fans, Astros fans and sports fans in Houston.”

“It’s a great day for the fans,” said Astros general counsel Giles Kibbe. “We will have broad coverage on AT&T, DirecTV and Comcast, and this will put us in position where we can continue implementing our plans with the teams.

“It’s been very costly to the teams, but we’re looking forward. We have broad coverage and media rights fees that will enable us to compete. We’re not looking back. We’re looking forward. It’s been long and hard, but it’s a positive day.”

A spokesman for Comcast, which opposed the reorganization plan, said, “We are disappointed with the judge’s decision and intend to file an appeal.” DirecTV and AT&T, which will acquire the network for $5,000 and will invest $50 million, had no comment.

CSN Houston launched in the fall of 2012 but was never available across most Houston-area TV households. Comcast put the network into bankruptcy in September 2013 when the Astros threatened to retake their broadcast rights because the network could not pay rights fees.