“Buckle your seatbelt and get ready.” That’s Jon Stewart‘s message to us.

The former Daily Show host spoke with the TimesTalks’ Chris Smith on his thoughts regarding the coming Donald Trump era.

“It is odd to be in a position of knowing that the leader of the free world tweeted that you were a p*ssy at 1:30 in the morning,” Stewart said regarding Trump according to The Huffington Post.

At a certain point in the interview, Stewart extended an olive branch of sorts to the folks responsible for putting Trump in the White House.

“Not everybody that voted for Trump is a racist,” Stewart said during the interview. “I don’t give a f*ck what any of you say to me. You can yell it at me, you can tweet it at me. They’re not all racists. Or they’re not giving tacit support to a racist system … We all give tacit support to exploitative systems as long as they don’t affect us that badly.”

"I'm optimistic because I can't believe how much greater this country is than when it started." – Jon Stewart on #Election2016 pic.twitter.com/UXvATQINTS — TimesTalks (@TimesTalks) December 1, 2016

He gave an example:

“…guess how those are made, guess who makes them?” Stewart said asking an audience member to pull out a phone. “’Oh yeah, but that’s … ‘ What, what is it? It’s not different, we all do that. All of our shit stinks and getting beyond that takes incredible work.”

Stewart talked about Trump’s rhetoric versus his actions, recalling how he attacked Hillary Clinton as an “unqualified Secretary of State because the way she handled classified material.”

“His selection for Secretary of State will be David Petraeus, who pled guilty to mishandling classified material,” Stewart continued. “He said [Clinton] was unqualified because she gave a speech to Goldman Sachs. His Secretary of the Treasury is somebody from Goldman Sachs. We’re in post-accountability.”

“Let’s look out for the losers. Having somebody you agree with have greater control over the levers of power might be a comfort, but it’s not a solution. Unfortunately, I think our expectation now is, ‘Oh, great, one of our team is in charge. I don’t have to think about this anymore.’ And I think it’s never actually been the case.”

A transcription of the most notable moments from the interview can be found at HuffPo.

Featured image via YouTube