Former Trooper Scott Kunstmann was accused of perjury and falsifying arrest reports.

Prosecutors have offered the former Florida Highway Patrol trooper accused of perjury and falsifying reports a no-jail plea deal.



Former trooper Scott Kunstmann was suspended, investigated and later fired and charged with falsifying documents and perjury — both felonies — after a Herald-Tribune investigation revealed that what transpired on his DUI stops did not match what he wrote in his official reports.



Prosecutors offered Kunstmann a plea deal consisting of two years of probation and two years of counseling, according to Dr. Robert G. Culbertson, a retired criminology and sociology professor from Fort Myers who Kunstmann arrested for DUI in November 2011, while the 72-year-old retiree was southbound on I-75.



Culbertson is livid that the former trooper will likely not be going to jail.



"I think it's horrible a state trooper can go out and arrest someone, put them in jail, tell a pack of lies and then walk away," Culbertson said Friday. "This guy should never have been on the road."



Neither Kunstmann nor his attorney Nevin Weiner returned calls seeking comment for this story.



Culbertson said he learned of the possible deal Thursday evening, after the prosecutor assigned to the case, Assistant State Attorney Shanna Hourihan, told him a deal had been offered.



Hourihan said the former trooper's lack of criminal history played a role in the decision.



"I cannot tell you the specifics of the actual plea offer, as this is a pending case, but we believe an appropriate plea was offered based on the defendant's lack of criminal history, the facts of the case and substantive mitigation by the defense," Hourihan said.



Kunstmann's conduct first drew scrutiny last year, when Culbertson noticed that what he read in the trooper's arrest report and heard when the trooper testified under oath in a deposition did not match his recollections of events.



It also did not match the events recorded on the trooper's own dash-mounted video camera.



Culbertson retained Sarasota attorney Andrea Mogensen, who has said the trooper was not truthful in either his arrest report or during a deposition she conducted.



The State Attorney's Office threw out Culbertson's case last year, just as jury selection was set to begin.



Kunstmann, 47, had been a trooper since 2007.