Throughout history, doubles teams come and go. Some duos have great runs for a single tournament, or even a couple months, but few teams stick together and take their synergy to the next level.

These 10 teams, although varying in time spent playing together, have all made their mark on the Melee doubles scene, and will go down in history as the 10 best teams of all time.

10. Husband and Wife

Although Kevin "Husband" Dassing and Christopher "Wife" Fabisczak do not share the same level of victories or dominance as other doubles teams on this list, they should be mentioned for their prominence in the early years of competitive Melee.

Their combination of Marth and Peach, each in their white outfits, facing off against old school legends like Ken and Isai have earned them a spot in memorable doubles play.

9. Shroomed and S2J

Dajuan "Shroomed" McDaniel is a highly skilled doubles player, and his recent run with Johnny "S2J" Kim have seen them rise through the ranks at a fast pace.

In a doubles environment full of deadly teams at their prime, taking third or second consistently at tournaments like Royal Flush and Smash'N'Splash 2 make their Sheik/Falcon combination not one to disregard.

8. Plup and Hungrybox

Juan "Hungrybox" Debiedma, one of the Five Gods of Melee, teamed with top player, Justin "Plup" McGrath, and won several tournaments in a short period of time.

The height of their team was 2014, where they took first at EVO 2014 and Smash the Record using a combination of Jigglypuff and Sheik/Samus.

7. Leffen and Ice

William "Leffen" Hjelte and Mustafa "Ice" Akcakaya have teamed on-and-off since 2013, but they have established a strong presence in doubles tournaments in recent times.

Although they tend to fall short of first place, their double Fox play has introduced an alternative to the usual doubles meta, and the two have taken out other powerful doubles teams in 2017.

6. Lucky and Mang0

The team "4 Leaf Mango" cemented their legacy in doubles tournaments from 2007 to 2014, where they consistently placed first more often than not.

In 2007, they defeated Ken and Isai at Super Champ Combo, and despite losing the tournament, the victory signaled a time of transition. Their combination of Jigglypuff/Fox and double spacies earned them big wins at Pound 4, the APEX series, and Kings of Cali.

5. Hungrybox and Mew2King

Hungrybox and Jason "Mew2King" Zimmerman are monsters in their own right for Melee singles, and even bigger monsters in Melee doubles.

When the two Gods team up, they rarely lose to anyone. Jigglypuff is a huge menace in doubles play because of its ability to wall out opponents, save teammates, and work as part of a team while still being a powerful single character.

Mew2King's support-heavy style matched up perfectly with Hungrybox and the two won every tournament they entered together until The Big House 5. They placed first in key tournaments like The Big House 3, EVO 2013, and APEX 2015.

4. Armada and Android

In recent tournaments, Adam "Armada" Lindgren and Andreas "Android" Lindgren have used the power of the brother meta to dominate the international stage.

After winning first place in numerous European doubles tournaments, Armada and Android have shown their ability in 2017, taking first in GENESIS 4, and Royal Flush just a short while ago. The Lindgrens use a combination of Sheik/Peach or Sheik/Fox. They are best known for creative combos and innovative teammate saves that showcase their high levels of synergy.

3. PewPewU and SFAT

Kevin "PewPewU" Toy and Zachary "SFAT" Cordoni have rarely teamed with anyone other than each other, instead developing Melee's most synergistic doubles team over time.

"Pewfat" is a major threat to any other doubles team. Their combination of Marth and Fox has granted them first place at EVO 2015, Smash Summit, and they were virtually unbeatable in 2016.

PewPewU and SFAT know each other's movements and combos so well that it seems like they share one mind as they play. SFAT tends to close in and output damage, while PewPewU uses Marth's attack range to keep the momentum in their favor.

2. Ken and Isai

Some smashers argue that Ken and Isai dominated the doubles scene in the early years of competitive Melee because of a lack of competition at the time. From 2003 to 2007, no other doubles team could even touch the duo, regardless of whether they went Marth/Sheik or Marth/Falcon.

When the best singles player in the world at the time (Ken) and the best doubles player in the world at the time (Isai) work together, the result is four straight years of domination with a handful of second place wins.

They definitely win first in terms of team name, as they called themselves "El Chocolate Diablo."

1. Armada and Mew2King

Armada and Mew2King take the top spot for taking first place in Doubles nearly every time they have ever entered.

Starting with a first place win in APEX 2012 and 2013, the two proceeded to win every doubles bracket they entered together until Paragon 2015. Mew2King is known for being the best doubles player in the world, but also stubborn in counter-picking and character choice.

Armada commented that, while at SKTAR 3 against Mang0 and PPMD, he had to persuade Mew2King to stay Sheik, having already won the first two games with their Peach and Sheik combo -- a decision that Armada believed would win them the game.

While they butted heads, they also balanced each other out in-game. Unfortunately, since Armada consistently teams with Android now, we'll never know of the potential legacy and dominance these two could have kept for years on end. Their winrate and domination whenever they decided to team won them the No. 1 spot as the best doubles team of all time.