CLEVELAND, Ohio -- For the second day in a row, a handful of activists visited Cuyahoga County Prosecutor Timothy J. McGinty's office to ask questions about the investigations into the police killings of Tanisha Anderson and Tamir Rice.

And for the second straight day, they said, they were told to "come back tomorrow."

The activists, which included Joshua Stephens, Don Bryant and two others, showed up at McGinty's office in the Cuyahoga County Justice Center about noon Wednesday, hoping to find out when a grand jury will hear evidence in the two November deaths involving Cleveland police.

"We just feel like (McGinty) is intentionally dragging his feet," Stephens said in a phone interview.

The quest began Tuesday, when four protesters sat in McGinty's office for close to an hour. McGinty's spokesman, Joe Frolik, told the group that if they came back Wednesday, McGinty might have time to meet with them, Stephens said.

In the people's office of Cuyahoga Cty, Prosecutor Timothy J. McGinty waiting for two police officers to be arrested for the murder of Tamir Rice, 12-year-old gunned down in Cleveland, 6 mm onths ago. Join us, we got peanut butter n jelly sandwiches. Posted by Don Bryant on Tuesday, June 16, 2015

A Cuyahoga County Sheriff's Deputy asked the four protesters who showed up at the office Wednesday to leave immediately, Stephens said. The deputy said the group could be arrested for trespassing, arguing the office was a place of official business and they had no business there.

Once the group explained they were asked to come to the office, the deputy agreed to let them stay for a few minutes, until they found out if they could meet with McGinty, Stephens said.

A few more deputies showed up, and the process repeated.

Eventually there were five sheriff's deputies to the four protesters. Stephens said the protesters were not chanting, and were not combative with the deputies.

Stephens exchanged some texts with Frolik, who eventually asked the group to come back Thursday. The group decided to leave, and three deputies followed them into the elevator and out of the building.

"It was really overkill," Stephens said.

Frolik offered a different account of what happened Tuesday. He said he asked the group to leave Tuesday because the office has a small waiting area reserved for victims, witnesses, attorneys and others who have appointments.

"I offered cards to the people who were here and told them how to email me to request an appointment," Frolik said. "One person took the card. No one emailed."

Frolik said he was not in the office when the group showed up again Wednesday, but said he asked the sheriff's deputies to ask the group to leave if they didn't have an appointment.

Sheriff's department spokesman John O'Brien did not return a message seeking comment.

The group's move comes days after McGinty's office released hundreds of pages of partially redacted investigative material collected by sheriff's deputies probing the death of Tamir. Cleveland police officers Timothy Loehmann and Frank Garmback shot Tamir in Cudell Recreation Center Nov. 22, after they responded to a report of a person with a gun.

A Cleveland judge found probable cause that Loehmann and Garmback should be charged for their respective roles in the shooting.

The group is also concerned about the status of the investigation into the death of Anderson, who died Nov. 13 while in police custody. The Cuyahoga County Medical Examiner ruled her death a homicide, and that the mentally ill woman who suffered from obesity and heart disease was restrained during her arrest.

Cleveland police handed their investigation of Anderson's death to McGinty's office in February, Frolik told Northeast Ohio Media Group at the time. McGinty has said his office will present both cases to a grand jury, but has declined to say when.

"We just want some kind of vague time frame," Stephens said.

Frolik stuck to that no comment Wednesday, saying it would violate state rules of procedure to discuss grand jury proceedings, including when a grand jury may hear a specific case.

He said his office is still reviewing both the Tamir Rice investigation and the Tanisha Anderson investigation, and declined to comment further.

Stephens said the group is has not decided whether to show up Thursday, for fear of the same outcome.

"That seems to be the universal response from (McGinty's) office to questions about Tamir's case," he said. "Come back tomorrow."

Update: Frolik said he returned one text message to Stephens, telling him he was in a meeting. He denied telling the group to come back Thursday.