If every Internet subscriber pays $5 monthly; then all music downloads should be free and legal. The Music Association of Canada cannot suck and blow at the same time.

David Boyle, Toronto



Already they over charge huge amount to buy their CDs, if only they could be practical in pricing their product, they would not be in this situation.

Steve Moore, Toronto



If that comes to pass, how and what would corporate and business subscribers pay ? Now I wonder if Toronto Star would also ask for a $5 fee since I came across this on the online edition ?

Mukesh Vashi, Brampton



Ridiculous. I have never downloaded music, never will, I'm lucky to have finally accomplished a level of computer savy to do basic tasks. I still have a collection of tapes for heaven's sake...I don't want to be bothered replacing them all with CD,s. So why should people like me, and there are plenty of us, pay for a service we will never use?

Jan Pinney, Elora



I object to paying for a service I would never use. If I want music I use a CD or listen to the radio. Why should I pay for some strangers' habit of pirating music from the internet

Aileen Carter, Toronto



Since we already pay a levy on blank media such as CDs and DVDs, and there is also a proposal to add a similar levy to hard drives and MP3 players, I don't see why we should have to pay yet another fee to supposedly compensate for downloaded music. Downloading music is already legal in Canada because of these levies, so why should we be slapped with another fee for doing something that is actually legal?

Iris Gray, Victoria



The idea is ridiculous. Should all mortgage payers be surcharged to help those who live beyond their means and default on their payments? Should all credit card users have to pay extra to bail out those who abuse credit? Should all car drivers have to pay an extra tax to subsidise those who evade payment? The truth of the matter is that the music business has brought its ills upon itself by its head-in-the-sand attitude.

Clive Warner, Monterrey, Mexico



What happens to this money that is collected? How can the possibly know how much a musician or song writer should receive?

Randy Drefs, Medicine Hat



Nothing wrong with paying $5 a month provided you WANT it. But I just dont get the thought process behind this ludicrous proposition of making everyone pay even if you never download music. Are we heading towards a communist/socialist internet usage, having to pay up for someone elses losses. I, for one, will not fork it.

Vikas Thusoo, Richmond Hill



$5 a month for music is the most ridiculous thing I've ever heard of, even if you are a music downloader. The only music I've actually ever downloaded was Radiohead's newest album, In Rainbows. Radiohead chose to release the music independently and actaully let you set your own price for the online download - a truly novel idea that the music industry should take note of. I have no doubts they've still made plenty of money.

Shawn Vickar, Calgary



How arrogant can these people be? First there was a tax on blank CDs, with the working assumption that anyone who burns a CD is ripping off an artist. How do these funds get disubursed? Why should Anne Murray get paid everytime I back up a database on a CD?

Dave Kingston, Toronto



Most people have said that this fee is unreasonable, rightly so indeed. However I see some disturbing trends in those responses - first of all it's difficult to believe that almost any broadband internet user has never downloaded any music, but even if that's true how can you justify your "throw the downloaders under the bus" attitude - this is nothing more than attack on our freedoms and right to privacy by aggressive corporate lobbies in this insane post-9/11 world. Fight for your rights or lose them forever!!

Ron Dyck, Edmonton



Considering the lousy music that record companies have been foisting on us for the past decade or two, I would suggest they work on actually cultivating talent and investing in developing artists rather than promoting interchangeable one hit wonders. People don't want to buy music that's disposable; they want something they'll still like in five years. Until there's better music available these companies don't deserve a penny from anyone.

Ilana McVeigh, Toronto



As a senior who only uses internet for e-mails and Pogo games I resent having to pay $5 for music. I have never downloaded any music nor will I ever. Should this charge appear on my bill I will cancel the internet outright.

Claude Leduc, Ottawa



Having been connected to the internet for more than 13 years and have yet to download 1 song I would be horrified to learn I would be contributing to celine dions hundreds of millions of dollar bank account. Make money the old fashion way and earn it.

Andy Vanklompenburg, Nanaimo



I do not down load or by music CD's. I should not have to subsidise the music industry. The Music industry does not subsidise my income tax.

Joe O'Byrne, Amherst, New Brunswick



Of course! Music stores are practically extinct due to WWW. When was the last time you saw line ups in the HMV store?! Downloading from the web is equivalent to buying from a regular store - thus, pay up!

Yana Doubrovine, Toronto



This is just the tip of the iceberg. Now that the core internet has become a household necessity, every Tom Dick and Musician wants a surcharge put on for their particular organization. If people are illegally downloading, then criminally charge and convict them.. Don't download the costs on to the normal user of the internet, like myself, who does not download..

Chris McRae, Ottawa



This is an absolutely moronic idea. People who have no interest in downloading music will be paying for nothing and also subsidizing the cost for those who do wish to download.

Tom Tadman, Scarborough



I am retired and on fixed income. I use the internet to keep in contact with friends but have never downloaded any music and have no intention of doing so. Fees for such would cause me to reevaluate my need for the internet at all. I simply cannot afford any more expenses eating away at my monthly pension.

Judy Court, Toronto



I stopped purchasing music long ago, not because I'm downloading it but because it is priced beyond what I perceive its value to be. I DO NOT download music, and cannot see any valid reason why I should be forced to pay a fee to do so.

Tony Heayn, Brampton



The internet can be used to pirate music, true. Cars can be used in bank robberies. Shall we apply a surcharge to car sales too? If this $5 fee comes into effect I will never pay for music again.

Scott Wiebe, Toronto



So people who don't download music will still be paying an extra $5/mo? That sounds like a terrible idea. The fees should be the responsibility of those who download the music - not a tax on everyone.

Jeni Ator, Toronto



What a great idea! Maybe we can save the auto industry with a $5 per month Internet Access Fee. And Toronto's budget problems - solved with an additional $5 fee! And climate change? Let's add another $5 on. Now isn't that easier than actually confronting the real issues at hand?

Paul Tenk, Toronto



I have always bought CDs: not once have I downloaded or shared music on the internet. If I am arbitrarily charged $5 a month on my internet, what incentive would I have to buy CD copies of music I have "already paid for"?

Gabriela Byron, Toronto



I use the internet but have never downloaded a piece of music -so why should I pay. It's appropriate for music downloaders - for them it's still a savings over purchasing CD's.

Bea Klug, Toronto



Why should my mom, who has never downloaded anything in her life except email pay $5 a month to the recording industry?

Craig Hall, Toronto



The idea is not bad but music comes from around the world. What if I only listen to music from an Australian band? Paying $5 to the Songwriters Association of CANADA won't make any sense!

Gavin Mill, Markham



Now now, everyone calm down. Im sure Rogers will collect the fees fairly and make sure everything is alright, just like it does everything else.

Dan Carter, Hamilton



I don't want to pay it either, but then, isn't this the same thing as having to pay school taxes when you don't have kids?

Robert Guimont, Toronto



Instead of imposing a new tax, stop and think about why piracy exists... These entities charge absurd prices then wonder why people don't want to pay. If they lowered their prices, people would buy legally. The same goes for software and games.

Bianca Devins, Toronto

