We caught up with Luka "perkZ" Perković, Gamer2's midlaner, to learn something about him now that he qualified for LCS. Although he's still in high school, perkZ showed us you always have a chance to do what you love and is an inspiration to lots of us.

Image courtesy of gamepedia.com

Hi Luka, thank you for participating in this interview. Tell us something little about yourself.

perkZ: Hello, my name is Luka Perković and I'm playing League of Legends for 3 and a half years. I qualified for LCS two months ago but I'm still attending high school in Zagreb.

Regardless your age, could you say that you are living your dream? Where do you see yourself in the future?

perkZ: I wouldn't say that this is my dream, but it's definitely something I enjoy doing. In near future, I can see myself playing professionally, yet later on I wish to go to college.

How do you manage to harmonize school, League of Legends and social life?

perkZ: I organize my time well, but I spend most of it playing League of Legends.

Since you live far away from your teammates, is it hard to maintain a friendly relationship with them?

perkZ: From my point of view, if you're having fun with people over the internet, you will be having fun with them in real life too. I never had any troubles with my teammates and I don't think I will in the future.

You are currently living in Zagreb, Croatia, where you were born. What do you think of competitive scene in Croatia? Do Croatians accept eSports with the same enthusiasm like most of the world?

perkZ: Esports scene is not yet developed in Croatia and I think there aren't enough professional players here for the country to develop soon.

Do you plan to move somewhere because of League of Legends anytime soon?

perkZ: I will be moving to Berlin this January.

Do you have your parents support about moving out so young to professionally play a game?

perkZ: Yes, I have my parent’s full support.

Image courtesy of Luka Perković (twitter.com)

In your opinion, which champions are best for mid lane in current meta?

perkZ: Kassadin, Ryze, Azir and Lulu.

Do you think that the upcoming season changes will drastically affect the gameplay?

perkZ: I'm not yet sure if they will, but I do hope so.

Against which midlaner do you think you have a great chance to win, and against which one to lose?

perkZ: I wouldn't like to talk about my chances against some midlaners and about their skills, but I'm mostly looking forward to play against Nukeduck and Febiven.

And for the last question, tell us, who was your greatest support through your journey to eSports scene? Would you like to thank someone?

perkZ: My greatest support through my whole journey was Joe "InnerFlame" Elouassi, current manager of Team Dignitas.

Thank you, Luka. We wish you all the best in your upcoming matches.