All Montgomery County and City of Rockville facilities will be closed and no programs will operate on Dec. 25 and Jan. 1.

Holiday hours for city facilities are as follows:

Rockville City Hall will be closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.

Rockville Senior Center will close at 5 p.m. on Monday and on Dec. 31 and will be closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.

Lincoln Park Community Center, Thomas Farm Community Center and Twinbrook Community Recreation Center will be open 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. on Monday, on Wednesday, on Dec. 31 and on Jan. 2. The centers will be closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.

Croydon Creek Nature Center will be closed on Monday and on Dec. 31. The center will be open from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m. Dec. 26. The center will be closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.

Glenview Mansion will be closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.

F. Scott Fitzgerald Theatre be closed Christmas through New Year's Day.

Rockville Swim and Fitness Center will be open 6 a.m. to 4 p.m. on Dec. 24 and 31 and closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.

Recycling and refuse collection for Monday and for Dec. 31 will not be affected. Collection for the remainder of each week will shift forward one day, with Friday collection made on Saturday.

The city also is recycling cut and artificial Christmas trees. Click here for details.

Parking will be free at city-owned meters and garages on Christmas Day and New Year's Day. For payment information on Rockville Town Square parking garages, go to rockvilletownsquare.com/parking.

For more information about city facilities or programs call 240-314-5000 or visitwww.rockvillemd.gov.

The following county and state facilities will be closed on Christmas Day and New Year's Day:

Montgomery County government offices. Offices also will be closed Monday.

State offices and courts.

Montgomery County Public School administrative offices will be closed Dec. 22-25 and Jan. 1.

County libraries. Branches also will be closed on Monday. Branches will close at 6 p.m. on Dec. 31. Olney Express Service will be closed Dec. 23 through Jan. 1. Gaithersburg Interim Library will be closed Dec. 24-25, Dec. 31 and Jan. 1.

All recreation facilities will be closed on Monday, on Christmas Day and on New Year's Day. All county community and neighborhood recreation centers will be closed Monday through Jan. 1. County senior centers will be closed Sunday through Jan. 1.

County liquor stores. Stores will be open 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. on Monday and on Dec. 31.

Shady Grove Processing Facility and Transfer Station. The station will close at 5 p.m. on Monday.

Recycling and refuse collection for Monday and for Dec. 31 will not be affected. Collection for the remainder of each week will shift forward one day, with Friday collection made on Saturday.

Parking will be free at county public garages, lots and curbside meters on Monday, on Christmas Day and on New Year's Day.

Transportation services are running on modified schedules on Christmas Day and New Year's Day:

Ride On: Sunday schedule. Service ends early Monday, Christmas Eve, with last buses departing terminals around 10 p.m.

Metrobus: Sunday schedule.

Metrorail: Sunday schedule.

TRiPS Commuter Stores near Silver Spring and Friendship Heights Metro stations will be closed Christmas Day and New Year's Day.