Mike English of the Blaze shoots during their round one NBL match against the New Zealand Breakers.

CJ Bruton of the Breakers shoots during the round one NBL match against the Gold Coast Blaze.

Gary Wilkinson of the Breakers takes a shot on goal under pressure from Larry Davidson of the Hawks during their round one NBL match.

Mika Vukona of the Breakers clears the ball under pressure during their round one clash with the Wollongong Hawks.

Joevan Catron of the Hawks drives to the basket under pressure from Gary Wilkinson of the Breakers during their round one NBL match.

Guard CJ Bruton waves to the Vector Arena crowd as the Breakers leave the court after warm-ups.

Coach Andrej Lemanis talks to his team during a first half timeout.

Breaker Tom Abercrombie tries to drive by Kings guard Luke Cooper.

Breakers guard Cedric Jackson tangles with Sydney's Luke Martin going for a loose ball.

Out in the open, Alex Pledger drives to the hoop, being blocked by the rim on a one-handed dunk.

In a New Zealand basketball record crowd 6383 filled Vector Arena to watch the Breakers and Kings.

Breakers forward Tom Abercrombie throws down as easy dunk during the first quarter against the Sydney Kings at Vector Arena.

Breakers guard Cedric Jackson in action, defended by Nathan Crosswell during NZ Breakers v Adelaide 36ers basketball match at the North Shore Events Centre.

Breakers guard CJ Bruton shoots a three pointer against the Wollongong Hawks at North Shore Events Centre.

Breakers player Tom Abercrombie looks to get past Hawks forward Oscar Forman.

Breakers guard Cedric Jackson tussles for the ball against Glen Saville (left) and Dave Gruber of the Hawks.

Breakers Forward Gary Wilkinson fires up after colliding with Hawks player Glen Saville on the way to the hoop.

Breakers forward BJ Anthony and Hawks forward Dave Gruber scramble for the ball.

Breakers coach Andrej Lemanis appeals to the referees for a call.

Tom Abercrombie soars over Townsville's Michael Cedar to block his shot.

Breakers coach Andrej Lemanis gets his message across against the Melbourne Tigers.

Breakers guard Cedric Jackson looks for a way through the Tigers defence.

Breakers guard Thomas Abercrombie completes an impressive slam dunk against the Melbourne Tigers.

Both teams erupt into an all out brawl.

Blaze's Anthony Petrie is ejected from the match.

Breakers Mika Vukona in action against the Gold Coast Blaze.

Tom Abercrombie of the Breakers under pressure from Chris Warren of the 36ers.

Cedric Jackson of the Breakers goes for the basket against the Adelaide 36ers.

Diamon Simpson (L) and Daniel Johnson (R) of the 36ers competes with Dillon Boucher (C) and Tom Abercrombie of the Breakers.

Mika Vukona of the Breakers competes with Diamon Simpson of the 36ers.

Gary Wilkinson of the Breakers reaches for the basket against the Adelaide 36ers.

Cedric Jackson drives to the basket during the Breakers game against the Perth Wildcats.

Jesse Wagstaff of the the Wildcats and Breakers' Benny Anthony Jnr. compete for the ball.

Tom Abercrombie of the Breakers drives past Ayinde Ubaka of the Melbourne Tigers.

CJ Bruton goes up for the lay-up.

Cam Tragardh of the Melbourne Tigers tries to get past the Breakers' Alex Pledger.

Breakers forward Dillon Boucher puts up a shot against the Adelaide 36ers.

Breakers forward Thomas Abercrombie hangs off the hoop against the Adelaide 36ers.

Breakers forward Mika Vukona helps up guard Cedric Jackson against the Melbourne Tigers.

Breakers forward Thomas Abercrombie flies at the basket against the Melbourne Tigers.

The North Shore Events Centre crowd gets behind the Breakers during their top-of-the-table defeat of the Perth Wildcats.

Breakers centre Alex Pledger grasps possession during the 73-67 win over the Perth Wildcats in Auckland.

Leon Henry shows his emotion after Breakers team-mate Cedric Jackson sunk a buzzer-beating shot against the Perth Wildcats.

CJ Bruton fights for posession during the Breakers clash with Wollongong at the NSEC.

A bemused Andrej Lemanis jokingly applauds the referee after a foul is called on Mika Vukona.

Tom Abercrombie rises above Glen Saville of the Wollongong Hawks.

Dillon Boucher tussles for position during the Breakers win over the Wollongong Hawks.

Gary Wilkinson of the Breakers wins the ball against the Adelaide 36ers.

CJ Bruton of the Breakers surges forward against the Adelaide 36ers.

Dillon Boucher of the Breakers celebrates after the match against the Adelaide 36ers.

Cedric Jackson of the Breakers goes for the basket against the Adelaide 36ers.

The teams are seperated by the ref after an unsportsman foul against Gold Coast Blaze forward Stephen Hoare.

Breakers coach Andrej Lemanis during the match against Gold Coast Blaze.

Gary Wilkinson of the Breakers beats Ben Allen of the Crocodiles to the rebound.

Peter Crawford (centre) of the Crocodiles looks to get past Dillon Boucher (right) and Tom Abercrombie of the Breakers.

Alex Pledger (right) of the Breakers contests for the ball with Elvin Mims of the Townsville Crocodiles.

Dillion Boucher of the Breakers in action against the Blaze.

Morgan Natanahira of the Breakers shoots against of the Blaze at the Gold Coast Convention Centre.

Jason Cadee of the Blaze shoots during their match against the Breakers at the Gold Coast Convention Centre.

Breakers point guard Cedric Jackson finished with 17 points and seven assists as the Breakers rolled by the 36ers 91-76 in Adelaide.

Jason Cadee of the Blaze passes against the New Zealand Breakers at the Gold Coast Convention Centre.

Leon Henry of the Breakers in action against the Gold Coast Blaze.

If there was any doubt these New Zealand Breakers are something special it was removed tonight in a pulsating, dramatic overtime opening game of the Australian NBL's grand final series.

The Breakers somehow, some way were able to take the best shots of a very, very good Perth Wildcats side and - on the back of some overtime heroics from CJ Bruton and Mika Vukona - nail a pulsating 104-98 victory to begin this best-of-three series in the perfect fashion.

They did so without getting a single minute out of arguably their best, certainly their most explosive, player in Thomas Abercrombie who had to sit and watch the best game of the season from the comfort of the bench.

1 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Tom Abercrombie holds the championship trophy aloft. 2 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Rio Bruton shows his dad is number one after CJ collected the grand finals MVP award. 3 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Alex Pledger shows off his championship ring. 4 of 57 Photosport Cedric Jackson delivers the ball to centre Gary Wilkinson as Perth's Shawn Redhage attempts a block. 5 of 57 Getty Images Dillon Boucher jumps for joy as the Breakers win their second straight Australian NBL title. 6 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ CJ Bruton of the Breakers ducks through the arms of Matt Knight and Brad Robbins of the Perth Wildcats. 7 of 57 Getty Images CJ Bruton gets the crowd going after hitting a three pointer in the grand finals decider. 8 of 57 PETER MEECHAM/Fairfax NZ Dan Carter and Jerome Kaino show their support for the NZ Breakers. 9 of 57 Getty Images New Zealand Breakers' coach Andrej Lemanis with the ANBL championship trophy. 10 of 57 Photosport New Zealand Breakers' Dillon Boucher participates in the championship-winning tradition of cutting down the nets. 11 of 57 Photosport The New Zealand Breakers' celebrate their victory in the ANBL finals series. 12 of 57 Jason Oxenham/Fairfax NZ Breakers' guard Cedric Jackson takes the ball to the hoop in game three of ANBL finals series against the Perth Wildcats. 13 of 57 Jason Oxenham/Fairfax NZ Breakers' Alex Pledger climbs high for a dunk. 14 of 57 Photosport The New Zealand Breakers and the Perth Wildcats get involved in an altercation in game three of the ANBL finals series in Auckland. 15 of 57 Peter Meecham/Fairfax NZ Breakers' forward Mika Vukona avoids the attention of Perth Wildcats' forward Shawn Redhage. 16 of 57 Peter Meecham/Fairfax NZ Breakers' guard CJ Bruton goes past Perth Wildcats' point guard Brad Robbins. 17 of 57 Getty Images Breakers and Wildcats players get involved in an altercation. 18 of 57 Peter Meecham/Fairfax NZ The crowd cheers as the Breakers take to the court during the third and deciding game of the ANBL finals series against the Perth Wildcats. 19 of 57 Getty Images Leon Henry and Dillon Boucher of the Breakers look on from the bench during game two. 20 of 57 Getty Images Shawn Redhage of the Wildcats celebrates with supporters at the end of the game during game two. 21 of 57 Getty Images Breakers playing discuss tactics during a break in play of game two of the ANBL finals series in Perth. 22 of 57 Getty Images Kevin Lisch of the Wildcats and Cedric Jackson of the Breakers contest for a loose ball during game two. 23 of 57 Getty Images Breakers and Wildcats players get involved in an altercation. 24 of 57 Getty Images Breakers big man during game two of the ANBL finals series in Perth. 25 of 57 Getty Images Leon Henry of the Breakers lays-up against Matt Knight of the Wildcats during game two. 26 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Cedric Jackson gets amongst the front-row fans after making a basket and being fouled. 27 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Mika Vukona looks to score down low under pressure from Luke Nevill. 28 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Small forward Leon Henry defends Perth's Cameron Tovey. 29 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Tom Abercrombie gingerly runs onto the court during player intros. 30 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Gary Wilkinson gets the Breakers fired-up pre-game. 31 of 57 Getty Images Dillon Boucher celebrates the Breakers win over Perth Wildcats in game one of the ANBL finals series. 32 of 57 Getty Images Leon Henry of the Breakers lays the ball up over Luke Nevill of the Perth Wildcats in game one of the ANBL finals series. 33 of 57 Getty Images Alex Pledger of the Breakers battles with two Perth Wildcats players for the ball in game one of the ANBL finals series. 34 of 57 Jason Oxenham/Fairfax NZ Breakers guard CJ Bruton on the ball. 35 of 57 Jason Oxenham/Fairfax NZ Breakers centre Gary Wilkinson drives into Perth Wildcats centre Luke Nevill in game one of the ANBL finals series. 36 of 57 Photosport Tom Abercrombie is treated on the floor while team-mates go after the referee. 37 of 57 Photosport Tom Abercrombie lies on the court in agony after severely straining ligaments in his left ankle. 38 of 57 Photosport The moment before Tom Abercrombie was taken out by Townsville's Peter Crawford on a breakaway dunk. 39 of 57 Photosport CJ Bruton raises his arms after a crucial fourth quarter three-pointer in the game three win. 40 of 57 Photosport Cedric Jackson hits the hardwood to grab possession for the Breakers. 41 of 57 Photosport MAKE OR BREAK: The Breakers are getting ready for a do-or-die match against Perth tonight. 42 of 57 Getty Images The Breakers celebrate after winning game two of the NBL Finals series against the Townsville Crocodiles. 43 of 57 Getty Images Eddie Gill of the Crocodiles passes the ball past Tom Abercrombie of the Breakers during game two. 44 of 57 Getty Images Russell Hinder of the Crocodiles looks dejected in game two of the NBL Finals series against the New Zealand Breakers. 45 of 57 Getty Images Dillon Boucher of the Breakers drives past Jacob Holmes of the Crocodiles during game two. 46 of 57 Getty Images Dillon Boucher of the Breakers makes a lay-up during game two. 47 of 57 Getty Images Michael Cedar of the Crocodiles attempts a jump shot over Cedric Jackson of the Breakers during game two. 48 of 57 Getty Images Mika Vukona of the Breakers drives past Todd Blanchfield of the Crocodiles during game two. 49 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers forward Thomas Abercrombie keeps the ball in play. 50 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers head coach Andrej Lemanis talks to his players. 51 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers forward Dillon Boucher scoots around Townsville Crocs forward Jacob Holmes. 52 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ High-fives for the Breakers in the NZ Breakers. 53 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers guard Cedric Jackson scoots around Townsville Crocs point guard Eddie Gill. 54 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers forward Thomas Abercrombie charges into Townsville Crocs forward Todd Blanchfield. 55 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers forward Dillon Boucher battles with Townsville Crocs forward Peter Crawford. 56 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers forward Dillon Boucher on the fast break chased by Townsville Crocs guard Michael Cedar. 57 of 57 JASON OXENHAM/Fairfax NZ Breakers guard Cedric Jackson passes under pressure from Townsville Crocs centre Luke Schenscher.

Without Abercrombie, the Breakers did extremely well to go toe-to-toe with this rugged Wildcats outfit and their outstanding MVP guard Kevin Lisch.

That they were able to come from six down late in regulation to nail a brilliant overtime win was the icing on the cake.

The Breakers now head to Perth for game two in eight days' time able to play with the freedom of a side one up knowing at worst they'll be coming home for the decider.

Getty Images MAKING THE PLAY: Matthew Knight of the Perth Wildcats lays the ball up under pressure from Cedric Jackson of the New Zealand Breakers.

A second straight championship is now just one tantalising win away for a club who simply do not know when to quit.

What a game it was. And at the end, even though there was the usual Perth chippiness, both sides can hold their heads high.

A record crowd of 9125 was treated to an instant classic between two clubs who do tend to produce the memorable when they meet.

In a game of runs, it had looked as though the Wildcats' steaming third quarter had put them in position to seal victory.

They got their noses in front in the final period and looked like they were on their way with an 85-79 lead with just under two and a-half minutes remaining.

But key buckets down the stretch to Cedric Jackson and Vukona and some outstanding defence helped the Breakers force overtime as the referees put their whistles in their pockets over a frantic finale.

Then in the five minutes of overtime, first Vukona and then Bruton stepped up splendidly to make nerveless plays to enable the Breakers to take the final grip on proceedings.

Vukona was a monster early, grabbing rebounds, powering inside; then when his body finally wore down up stepped Bruton to nail a pair of triples that sealed the deal.

Jackson had a huge game for the victors, finishing with 25 points and eight assists as he slipped back into his best form.

But Bruton was not far behind him, going five-of-12 from deep, six-of-15 overall for 20 points to go with three assists and two boards.

Of course no one loves the big moment like the veteran Aussie, and down the stretch it was clear to all that the Breakers had the game-winner in their midst.

Daryl Corletto added 16 points (5/10 FG, 4/6 3PT) for the winners, Gary Wilkinson had 12 points and seven boards and Dillon Boucher nine points, seven rebounds and four assists as he continued to make big plays when it mattered.

Vukona came good late to finish with 14 points and five rebounds.

Alex Pledger weighed in with a solid eight points and four boards and made two huge free-throws in overtime when Vukona had to retire with cramp.

Lisch led the Cats with a game-high 27 points and had quality backup from Matt Knight (17 points/five rebounds) and Shawn Redhage (15 points/five boards).

But they will be cursing letting this one slip through their grasp after a magnificent third-quarter fightback that put them in the box seat.

The signs hadn't looked good early when the Cats, perhaps buoyed by Abercrombie's absence, got off to an explosive 14-2 start inside the first four minutes.

But then the home team exploded on a 22-4 run of their own to roar into the lead, 28-24 at the end of the first.

The Breakers knocked down five triples in this period, a pair apiece to Bruton and Corletto as they showed they were here to play - even without their classy Tall Black Abercrombie.

That intensity continued in the second quarter when the Breakers held the Wildcats to just 11 points and, on the back of some inspirational play from Jackson, forged out to a 15-point lead.

Jackson, playing like the MVP he perhaps should have been, was magnificent in the first half, knocking down six of his eight shots for a game-high 14 points to go with four assists.

Corletto weighed in with 11 points as he nailed three of his four looks from deep, while Bruton and Wilkinson added eight and seven points respectively.

The Breakers also did a great job of restricting MVP Kevin Lisch to just five first-half points, as the Cats offence cooled off after their fast start.

But the men from the wild west, chasing their sixth NBL title in their 26th consecutive playoff appearance, are nothing if not fighters.

Back they came in the third quarter, a 17-2 run early in the third erasing the deficit and leaving us with a thriller on our hands.



NZ Breakers 104 (Cedric Jackson 25, CJ Bruton 20, Daryl Corletto 16, Mika Vukona 14, Gary Wilkinson 12), Perth Wildcats 98 (Kevin Lisch 27, Matthew Knight 17, Shawn Redhage 15, Luke Nevill 13, Jesse Wagstaff 12). 1Q: 28-24; HT: 50-35; 3Q: 68-66; FT: 84-84.