The father of Daron Wint, the man suspected of killing a Northwest D.C. couple, their young son, and their housekeeper, had been so frightened by threats his son made to shoot his own family that he sought a protective order barring the man from contacting them for a year.

Maryland court records show that over the last decade Mr. Wint has been the subject of numerous peace and protective orders.

One taken out by his own father in 2005 describes how the then 21-year-old Mr. Wint stood outside of his father’s Lanham home and threatened to shoot his father and step-mother. Police were called to the scene, but Mr. Wint came back afterward.

“He stood in the street in front of the house and continued to threaten me and my wife,” wrote Mr. Wint’s father in a handwritten application for a protective order filed in Prince George’s County District Court. “Threats were to be on the lookout for him, I should have made the officer pat him and they would have found what he had under his clothing for me.”

D.C. police have named Mr. Wint as a suspect in the gruesome killings of Savvas Savopoulos; his wife, Amy; their 10-year-old son, Philip; and their housekeeper, Veralicia Figueroa.

First responders found their bodies May 14 inside the Savopouloses’ multi-million-dollar Woodley Park home after responding to extinguish a fire there. The family is believed to have been held captive in the home the night before, and media reports indicate that $40,000 in cash was delivered to the home shortly before the fire broke out the afternoon of May 14.

In a press conference Thursday, Metropolitan Police Chief Cathy L. Lanier said Mr. Wint at one point had worked for Mr. Savopoulos at his business, American Iron Works, which is based in Hyattsville.

The D.C. Medical Examiner has not ruled a cause of death in the four homicides, but there is speculation that the victims may have been beaten while held captive as at least three of the four victims suffered either blunt force trauma or wounds from sharp objects. Police said the fire at the home was set intentionally.

The protective order sought by Mr. Wint’s father sought to ban him from the family’s Lanham home, which was one of several locations in Prince George’s County that police searched Wednesday night. The order also sought to keep Mr. Wint away from the elementary school and day care that his then 8-year-old sister attended.

Copyright © 2019 The Washington Times, LLC. Click here for reprint permission.