Last week, we took a stab at naming one All-Star squad that spanned both leagues, and judging by the actual rosters that were announced Sunday we guessed pretty well.

But what about, for lack of a better term, the Non-Stars? The players who've put up the most disappointing first halves in baseball, relative to expectations? What would that team look like?

FAGAN: The best players not on an All-Star roster — yet

Let's go position by position and find the players who fit the bill:

C: Jonathan Lucroy, Rangers

Numbers: .263/.311/.375, 4 HR, 20 RBI, 0.1 WAR

Why he's here: Lucroy's numbers are way down from his career averages across the board, and he's in danger of posting his lowest OPS since his rookie season in 2010. One of the better offensive catchers in baseball up until this year, Lucroy was supposed to be a key cog in a powerful Rangers lineup but has underachieved just like the entire team. There have been rumblings that the team is listening to offers for him, which shows just how far out of favor he's fallen.

1B: Miguel Cabrera, Tigers

Numbers: .264/.358/.456, 11 HR, 39 RBI, 0.5 WAR

Why he's here: First base was a tough position to fill, because there really isn't one guy who's having the kind of year that would land him on this list. So it's the future Hall of Famer Cabrera almost by default, as he's sporting what would be the lowest slugging percentage of his career and his lowest OPS since 2003. It's worth noting that Cabrera went crazy at the plate in the second half last year, so his stay on this list may be short-lived.

2B: Rougned Odor, Rangers

Numbers: .211/.249/.387, 14 HR, 35 RBI, -0.3 WAR

Why he's here: The league seems to have adjusted to Odor after his breakout 2016 season, and he's yet to adjust back. Like his teammate Lucroy, Odor has underachieved considerably with an OPS that right now is 162 points lower than his total from last year. He's never been an on-base demon, but this year he's striking out at an alarming rate and managed just one walk the entire month of June. He's dug himself quite a hole in the first half, and he's yet to find the answers to get himself out.

SS: Trevor Story, Rockies

Numbers: .224/.305/.409, 11 HR, 31 RBI, 0.6 WAR

Why he's here: Expectations were sky-high for Story after his impressive debut last year, when he looked to be neck-and-neck with Corey Seager in the NL ROY race before an injury ended his season early. He hasn't quite lived up to those expectations thus far, posting mostly pedestrian numbers while playing in one of the best hitter's parks in the game. He hasn't been bad, per se — he's dealt with injuries this year, too — but considering what he showed last year, it's hard not to be disappointed with the numbers he's put up in the first half.

The Rockies' Trevor Story has struggled to match the performance he showed early in his rookie season. (Getty Images)

3B: Manny Machado, Orioles

Numbers: .217/.289/.420, 15 HR, 38 RBI, 1.0 WAR

Why he's here: The past two seasons made it look like Machado would be a perennial MVP candidate, which is why his start to the year has been so puzzling. He was bothered by a wrist injury early in June, and it's possible that it's still affecting him, but that doesn't explain away his struggles in April and May. Whatever the reason, Machado's first half might be the most disappointing in either league.

HOME RUN DERBY: Participants, date, time, how to watch

OF: Carlos Gonzales, Rockies

Numbers: .221/.300/.348, 6 HR, 20 RBI, -0.9 WAR

Why he's here: CarGo went through a horrendous slump in June, which at one point saw him go hitless in 27 straight at-bats. His numbers never recovered and he's on track to post his worst career numbers over a full season just before hitting free agency this winter. Talk about awful timing.

OF: Gregory Polanco, Pirates

Numbers: .246/.310/.379, 6 HR, 22 RBI, -0.1 WAR

Why he's here: He was expected to be a key cog in the Pirates' lineup after posting career-best numbers last year; however, the struggles that plagued him in the second half of '16 have carried over into this year. Polanco's numbers are rather pedestrian, and while he's had flashes this year (a .900 OPS in May, for instance) he hasn't been able to keep it up (a .520 OPS in June).

OF: Kyle Schwarber, Cubs

Numbers: .171/.295/.378, 12 HR, 28 RBI, -0.7 WAR

Why he's here: No one will forget his incredible comeback from a devastating injury last season to play in the World Series and help push the Cubs over the finish line. But Schwarber hasn't been able to carry over that momentum into this season, to the point where his struggles became so pronounced that the Cubs had no choice but to send him to the minors to get straightened out. This definitely wasn't the season anyone had in mind for Schwarber after watching him hit .412 in the World Series last fall.

DH: Albert Pujols, Angels

Numbers: .234/.278/.372, 11 HR, 52 RBI, -1.2 WAR

Why he's here: Father Time is undefeated, as the old saying goes, and he seems to finally be catching up to Pujols. While he's still a smart, dangerous hitter at times, Pujols has seen his overall numbers plummet this year to career lows virtually across the board. And he still has four years left on his contract. Yeesh.

Albert Pujols reacts after striking out. (Getty Images)

SP: Rick Porcello, Red Sox

Numbers: 5.06 ERA, 1.51 WHIP, .312 BAA, -0.3 WAR

Why he's here: Like Dallas Keuchel in 2016, Porcello has been a huge disappointment the year after winning the AL Cy Young Award. Even if he wasn't expected to match last year's achievements, few could have seen such a major drop in production for Porcello, who hasn't been able to fool anyone this season. His teammate David Price could've taken this spot, too.

RP: Mark Melancon, Giants

Numbers: 4.35 ERA, 1.35 WHIP, .298 BAA, 4 blown saves, 0.1 WAR

Why he's here: The Giants gave him a monster contract last winter to fix their bullpen woes. It hasn't quite worked out that way, as Melancon has as many blown saves this season as he did in all of 2016 and has found his way to the DL twice. It's not much better than what the Giants got from their bullpen last year, only it's costing them a lot more money this time. In a year when almost nothing has gone right for the Giants, Melancon's performance still manages to stand out.