I am a colorful creature that values love and equality above all else. I have a loving home environment and am a strong advocate for women's rights and LGBTQ equality. I have a loving boyfriend and a terrorist disguised as an orange cat with an vendetta against paper towel rolls. I am very opinionated and very loud at times, but I always mean well. Cheers!

As people, we rely way too much on appearance and how people perceive us. There is a need to be accepted and liked ingrained within almost every mind. It is such that in today’s society, it is difficult to find any single person, let alone any company that accepts all the colours in the crayon box.

This needs to be rectified. There are many topics of discussion that this article could be referring to with the above statements, but we’re going to start with something as simple as hair colour. I have never understood dress code rules and regulations regarding hair colour. They make zero sense. Hair colour does nothing to deter or take away from work performance. The only excuse I have ever heard is that it’s ‘distracting’. You know who it distracts? 3 year olds…but even then they move on once you sate their curiosity.

Adults should be well past the stage of believing that hair colour has any iota of sway in productivity, but time and time again, I see hair colour included in my friends’ dress code rules for employers. If I want my hair to resemble unicorns fluffy and magical behind, well, that’s my prerogative. Blue hair colour does not cause Jan in billing or Eric in tech to do their job any less fabulously. Hair colour can be a way to express ones’ personality in a way that clothes may not always be able to.

While I’m on the topic, clothes should not determine ones’ social status or ability to hold a job. I would be perfectly fine if Sebastian in collections came to work sporting goth attire with a few extra piercings, but the fact of the matter is that people simply do not accept others for who they are. Strange and unusual is a big ol’ fat no no in the work place. You simply don’t see the CEO of most companies with purple hair and skinny jeans, but I don’t know why. I feel like there are so many standards in society that were established eons ago that simply do not hold a candle with today’s society.

Personally, I would feel much more comfortable if Jan from billing decided to change up her hair from conservative blonde to coca-cola bottle red. If Eric in tech wants to wear fine tailored suits everyday and gauge his ear lobes to see through proportions, that’s just fine with me. I feel like we need to be a little more accepting of change, because the world as we know it is changing…and the strict stubborn rules of yesteryear are being left for the birds.