WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange has slammed the ABC, accusing the national broadcaster of breaching their own code of practice.

Assange said he should have been asked for a response to comments made about him by Hillary Clinton during an interview which aired in Australia on Monday.

The WikiLeaks founder's criticism comes as Four Corners interviewer Sarah Ferguson revealed on radio she thought Hillary Clinton 'has been through enough'.

Scroll down for video

WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange (pictured) has slammed the ABC, accusing the national broadcaster of breaching their own code of practice

Assange said he should have been asked for a response to comments made about him by Hillary Clinton (pictured) during an interview which aired in Australia on Monday

In response to a retweet (pictured) by Four Corners producer Sally Neighbour, Assange said it was 'pathetic' and showed the 'extreme unprofessionality' of the ABC

'A sad day for Four Corners,' Assange told Daily Mail Australia, 'WikiLeaks has a pristine record for accuracy. Clinton stands alone in suggesting otherwise.'

'There was no push back on Clinton's ridiculous conspiracy theories or use of weasel words. The single greatest contributor to Clinton's downfall was not brought up: her strategy to elevate Donald Trump. We were not contacted to rebut.'

After first attacking Clinton for calling him a 'tool of Russian intelligence' and a 'nihilistic opportunist', Assange then took aim at the taypayer-funded broadcaster.

In response to a retweet by Four Corners producer Sally Neighbour, Assange said it was 'pathetic' and showed the 'extreme unprofessionality' of the ABC.

The retweet, since deleted, was a link to the Four Corners interview captioned 'Assange is Putins (sic) b****. We all know it!'

Assange cited the ABC's own code of practice, which states: 'Where allegations are made about a person or organisation, make reasonable efforts in the circumstances to provide a fair opportunity to respond.'

After first attacking Clinton for calling him a 'tool of Russian intelligence' and a 'nihilistic opportunist', Assange then took aim at the taypayer-funded broadcaster (pictured is Four Corners producer Sally Neighbour)

Describing himself as an 'Australian political refugee', Assange first hit back at Clinton's claims in the interview.

He called Clinton a 'notorious liar' and her statements 'defamatory', disputing her claims about the timing of WikiLeaks releases during the election.

Interviewer Sarah Ferguson appeared on radio on Monday, where she revealed she deliberately avoided asking Hillary about Bill Clinton.

'I reckon she's been through enough,' she said when asked whether the pair discussed Bill Clinton's infidelity by Jonesy and Amanda on WSFM.

'You know it's a very interesting relationship. It's a very interesting marriage, but I don't think every time she sits in a chair she needs to be asked about her husband.'

Interviewer Sarah Ferguson (pictured) appeared on radio on Monday, where she revealed she deliberately avoided asking Hillary about Bill Clinton

Earlier in the interview Ms Ferguson mentioned Bill's opposition to her recent book What Happened, and his desire to change her schedule at the end of her campaign.

Ms Ferguson was then asked whether she raised those issues with Hillary Clinton, or whether she mentioned Bill's cheating.

Former Labor leader Mark Latham said Ms Ferguson's refusal to ask Clinton about her husband is evidence of left wing bias at the broadcaster.

'This interview with the far left journalist Sarah Ferguson tells you everything you need to know about the fake news media and the massive decline in journalistic ethics,' said Mr Latham.

In response to a retweet by Four Corners producer Sally Neighbour, Assange said it was 'pathetic' and showed the 'extreme unprofessionality' of the ABC (pictured)

Assange cited the ABC's own code of practice, which states: 'Where allegations are made about a person or organisation, make reasonable efforts in the circumstances to provide a fair opportunity to respond' (pictured)

In response to Assange's remarks on social media, Ms Neighbour called the offensive tweet 'a mistake, since undone' and offered him full right of reply.

'We're not going to reward the ABC for breaching its own code of conduct,' said Assange.

'It's a typical yellow journalism tactic to defame someone who won't give you an interview -- then to offer them a 'right of reply'.'

Ms Neighbour then claimed an interview request was made on September 19, to which Assange said that request was not an opportunity for right of reply.

Assange has been living in the Ecuadorian embassy in London since 2012, and has been a vocal critic of Hillary Clinton.

In response to Assange's remarks on social media, Ms Neighbour called the offensive tweet 'a mistake, since undone' and offered him full right of reply (pictured)

After the Four Corners interview aired Assange tweeted a link to it captioned: 'There's something wrong with Hillary Clinton'.

'It is not just her constant lying. It is not just that she throws off menacing glares and seethes thwarted entitlement'.

'Something much darker rides along with it. A cold creepiness rarely seen' he said.

WikiLeaks released emails and documents from the Democratic National Committee during the 2016 US presidential election.

Assange has consistently denied accusations the releases were made on behalf of the Russian government, and has said the Russians were not the source of the leaks.

Ms Neighbour then claimed an interview request was made on September 19, to which Assange said that request was not an opportunity for right of reply (pictured)

Clinton has claimed WikiLeaks has never released anything about Russia, but Assange claims his organisation has published hundreds of thousands of documents pertaining to that nation.

An ABC spokesperson told Daily Mail Australia: 'As Sally Neighbour stated on Twitter straight away, the retweet was a mistake and quickly undone.

'The program contacted Julian Assange regarding an interview well in advance, and the offer remains open.

'Hillary Clinton has spoken a lot about issues relating to her marriage over the past decades — Sarah Ferguson had a lot of fresh ground to cover in her interview, which was more relevant to the news cycle.'