All praises to Allah who said “Allah loves not the utterance of harsh speech except by one who has been wronged. And ever is Allah Hearing and Knowing.” And peace and blessings be upon the Messenger of Allah and his family and all of his companions. As for what comes forth;

Hay’at Tahrir Shaam has strived since it has been launched to establish a Sunni entity which gathers the capacities of the people of Shaam to repel the transgressing enemy, and to represent the revolution of the people of Shaam in a way that suits them. It sacrificed the costly and precious to achieve this noble goal. Except that some frantic people -may Allah guide them and forgive them- with their limited sight and narrow vision were against this course from the beginning. And they did not stop there, rather they strived hard to crush and shake this building and spread turmoil and rumors in it under several excuses and different methods which reached the level of lies and defamation.

The leadership tried to contain the situation by dialogue and discussion, there have been meetings after meetings to explain the matter in the hope that they would step back, but to no avail. Until the scholarly reconciliation initiative was launched of which we translated our position practically on the actual ground, with calls to meetings on the ground, removed far away from the talks in the media and its incitements. But they refused -and with strange obstinacy- to even sit despite the repeated calls. They threw against the wall every call to calmness.

As they exploited the preoccupation of Hay’at Tahrir Shaam who were busy defending against the transgressing Rawafid and Khawarij in the heated situation in which the fronts presently are; not to incite towards Ribaat and Jihaad, rather to demoralize and disappoint the youth through the spread of confusion. Which in the end comes to the conclusion of judging a Sunni Mujahid gathering, which performs the obligation of our time, with deviation and corruption. This during a time in which we need unity of word and rank the most.

And due to the increasing harm and evil which these gatherings caused, they were informed and alarmed previously that the matter will be brought before judicial authorities after the attempts of reconciliations failed and the situation could not stay hanging without resolution. So the leadership of Hay’at Tahrir Shaam departing from their obligation towards the arena and towards its soldiers, to prevent the arena from slipping to dangerous consequences, and after the road to desired reconciliation was blocked; it presented a list calling the heads of turmoil to a just Sharia court which will show the reality. And the case is now with the judicial authorities to come with its decisive word.

In conclusion we would like to explain that a project for which blood is spilled, people are displaced and souls are taken, we will not neglect its protection and its defense with every legitimate method. And we will not allow irresponsible abusive hands to spread harm and evil from the people of exceedance or the people of abandonment. And Allah is the granter of success. And all praises are due to Allah the Lord of the worlds.

Original: