

Andy Johnson, CTVNews.ca





An email from the Prime Minister's Office used combat-like language in a discussion about helping new cabinet ministers transition into their jobs, suggesting a list of "friend and enemy stakeholders" was needed as part of the orientation process.

The email, obtained by CTV, was sent to ministerial staffers by Erica Furtado in the issues management department of the PMO with the subject line 'Transition Binder Check List."

It outlined the information staffers needed to compile for incoming cabinet ministers.

The list includes topics such as what to say at Question Period, hot-button issues to look out for, even what to avoid ("pet bureaucratic projects") and who to avoid: "bureaucrats that can't take no (or yes) for an answer."

Item nine on the 10-item list is: 'Who to engage or avoid: friend and enemy stakeholders."

The goal is to highlight “problematic” bureaucrats, environmental groups, industry or civic associations, a source told CTV News.

Brent Rathgeber, an Alberta MP who resigned from the Conservative caucus last month, said the “enemy” list requests expose the inner workings of Prime Minister Stephen Harper’s government.

“The PMO staffers see the world in two colours: black and white,” he said. “You’re either good or bad, or in this case, you’re either friendly or evil.”

Here is the full transition binder checklist:

What to say in question period;

What to expect soon: hot issues, legal actions and complaints;

What to expect later: long-term issues;

What to do: status of mandate items, off-mandate items;

What to avoid: pet bureaucratic projects;

Who to avoid: bureaucrats that can't take no (or yes) for an answer (this item was dropped from the list)

What to attend: upcoming events, meetings and FPTs (federal/provincial/territorial meetings);

Who to appoint: Outstanding GICs (Governor in Council appointments) and hot prospects;

Who to engage or avoid: friend and enemy stakeholders;

Private Members Bills -- lines and caucus packages.

But newly minted Immigration Minister Chris Alexander said the checklist wasn’t in his briefing books.

“I’ve never heard of them, I’ve never seen them. They’re not part of the orientation process for a new minister, in my case,” he said.

Julie Vaux, a spokesperson for the PMO, issued a statement Tuesday responding to the report about the leaked email. However, she declined to speak specifically about the transition checklist.

“While we don't comment on internal communications, we are collaborating with our ministers, especially new ministers, to ensure they are fully briefed so they can continue their work on behalf of Canadian taxpayers,” Vaux said in an email to CTV News.

Deputy NDP leader Megan Leslie called the revelations part of an “alarming pattern” of partisanship within the Conservative party.

“It’s very troubling that the first thing new ministers are being told about their new responsibilities is who to ignore in their own departments and which Canadians to put on the Conservatives’ blacklist -- they seem to think that anyone who disagrees with Stephen Harper is their “enemy,” Leslie said in a statement.

On Monday, Harper announced the appointment of eight new cabinet ministers -- four women and four men -- as part of the largest cabinet shuffle since he first took office.

With a report from CTV’s Richard Madan