2 of 5

Greg Bartram-USA TODAY Sports

Commence the Gregg Berhalter era in Columbus.

The former U.S. men's national team defender was announced as the seventh head coach in club history last November. After spending the last two years overseas, Berhalter returns to the league he called home during the twilight years of his career. His enrollment in the MLS coaching ranks, however, is not the first time he's held the reins at a professional level.

After retiring as a player in 2011, Berhalter was named head coach of Swedish club Hammarby IF. His appointment was a historic one. The New Jersey native became the first American to ever manage a professional football club in Europe.

He was fired after 19 months due to lack of productive play from the offensive side.

Ironically enough, that's exactly what Berhalter expressed he'd like to bring to Columbus in his introductory press conference last year:

My ideas about soccer are attacking minded views, that [involve] a dynamic team that can get forward very quickly - that can move the ball quickly. I believe in a possession-based game and I would say that the defensive side of it has to do with organization. I want to organize defensively. I wouldn't necessarily make that link though to the team being defensive minded. My ideas about soccer are very offensive and I want the team to play nice and attack the football.

But all coaches say that on day one.

What all coaches don't say—or at least aren't supposed to say, according to Portland Timbers owner Merritt Paulson—are the reasons one decides to turn down a proposed transaction.

That's exactly what Berhalter did when he publicly expressed why the Crew opted not to accept a loan for Toronto FC midfielder Matias Laba. That's exactly what Paulson took issue with on his Twitter account.

Well, indirectly: "If coach thumps his chest to media about specific trades he has rejected, he ain't getting more trade offers. Amazing that happens."

Rule of thumb: Don't subtweet.

A ball hasn't even been rolled yet and Berhatler is already ruffling a few feathers. These aren't exactly the type of headlines a blue-collared club like the Columbus Crew typically garnish.

So, yes, commence said era.