Follow us 101.6k

This salad is one of my "grab & go" favourites. It's great for anyone with a busy lifestyle looking for a sating and nutritious low-carb meal they can take to work. I always have hard-boiled eggs and keto-friendly mayo in my fridge. This way I save time and money and avoid temptations. If you want to succeed with your healthy low-carb eating, you should plan your cooking at least a few days in advance.

0 hours, 0 minutes

Hands-on 5 minutes Overall 5 minutes

Nutritional values (per serving)

3.9 grams 1.5 grams 41.4 grams 49.7 grams 8.8 grams 626 calories

Total Carbs 5.4 grams Fiber 1.5 grams Net Carbs 3.9 grams Protein 41.4 grams Fat 49.7 grams of which Saturated 8.8 grams Calories 626 kcal Magnesium 63 mg (16% RDA) Potassium 655 mg (33% EMR)

Macronutrient ratio: Calories from carbs (3%), protein (26%), fat (71%)

Ingredients (1 serving, large salad bowl)

1 small head lettuce, Romaine or Little Gem (100 g/ 3.5 oz)

140 g tinned tuna, drained (5 oz)

2 eggs, hard-boiled, free-range or organic

2 tbsp mayonnaise, try my home-made mayo (30 g/ 1.1 oz)

1 medium spring onion or bunch chives (15 g/ 0.5 oz)

1 tbsp fresh lemon juice

1 tbsp extra virgin olive oil

salt to taste (I used pink Himalayan)

Note: Use less tuna if you this recipe is too high in protein for you. Find out what's your ideal protein intake using our keto calculator.

A fun way to learn about healthy low-carb eating! Take the Keto Diet Quiz

Print Recipe Download Recipe

Instructions

Tear the leaves of the lettuce, wash and drain in a salad spinner or with a paper towel. Spread the leaves over the bottom of the serving bowl. Add drained and shredded tuna.

To avoid unhealthy vegetable oils that may often be used in tuna products, get tuna in extra virgin olive oil or in brine. I avoid buying canned foods and get tuna in glass jars instead. This will minimise your exposure to toxic BPAs that may often be present in canned foods. Top with hard-boiled eggs (see instructions in this recipe to see how to hard-boil eggs), mayo mixed with lemon juice and freshly chopped spring onion. Drizzle with extra virgin olive oil and enjoy!



Do you like this recipe? Share it with your friends! Pinterest Reddit

Martina Slajerova Creator of KetoDietApp.com I changed the way I ate in 2011, when I was diagnosed with Hashimoto’s, an autoimmune disease that affects the thyroid. I had no energy, and I found it more and more difficult to maintain a healthy weight. That’s when I decided to quit sugar, grains, and processed foods, and to start following a whole-foods-based ketogenic approach to food. More posts by Martina Slajerova