Former US President Barack Obama is planning on meeting with Chinese President Xi Jinping and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi during an upcoming visit to the two countries where he is scheduled to speak at various summits.

Mr Obama is scheduled to first make a stop in China, and then India, before flying to Paris, a spokesperson for the former president told The Hill.

The overseas trip was first reported by the Times of India last week, which noted that Mr Obama will be attending an Obama Foundation event in December.

We’ll tell you what’s true. You can form your own view. From 15p €0.18 $0.18 $0.27 a day, more exclusives, analysis and extras.

The forty-fourth president’s trip to India will come on the heels of first daughter Ivanka Trump’s visit to the same country. President Donald Trump recently finished a five-nation tour of Asia, when he met both Mr Xi and Mr Modi. Ms Trump, who is also a White House adviser, recently met with Mr Modi during during her trip at the eight Global Entrepreneurship Summit in Hyderabad.

“It was an honour to meet with you Prime Minister Modi. Thank you for co-hosting the 8th annual Global Entrepreneurship Summit!” Ms Trump wrote on Twitter after the summit, where she had spoken about women entrepreneurs.

Since leaving the White House earlier this year, Mr Obama has broken from recent tradition for outgoing presidents to wade into political debates facing the nation.

Shape Created with Sketch. Protest in Manila against Donald Trump's visit to the Philippines Show all 14 left Created with Sketch. right Created with Sketch. Shape Created with Sketch. Protest in Manila against Donald Trump's visit to the Philippines 1/14 Riot police block protesters during a rally near the US embassy AFP/Getty Images 2/14 Protesters shout slogans while displaying portraits of U.S. President Donald Trump and Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte AP 3/14 Activists clash with riot police EPA 4/14 Protesters burn a banner of Donald Trump AFP/Getty Images 5/14 Protesters against Donald Trump's visit AP 6/14 Protesters deface portraits of Donald Trump and Rodrigo Duterte AP 7/14 Protesters clash with anti-riot police officers as they try to march towards the U.S. embassy REUTERS 8/14 A mural bearing the image of Donald Trump and Rodrigo Duterte is burnt REUTERS 9/14 Activists march on a road leading to the US embassy during a protest in Manila EPA 10/14 Protesters scuffle with riot police AFP/Getty Images 11/14 Protesters shout anti-US slogans as they burn a banner featuring the image of US President Donald Trump AFP/Getty Images 12/14 Activists clash with riot police EPA 13/14 Protesters display placards as they shout anti-US slogans AFP/Getty Images 14/14 Anti-riot police officers block protesters REUTERS 1/14 Riot police block protesters during a rally near the US embassy AFP/Getty Images 2/14 Protesters shout slogans while displaying portraits of U.S. President Donald Trump and Philippine President Rodrigo Duterte AP 3/14 Activists clash with riot police EPA 4/14 Protesters burn a banner of Donald Trump AFP/Getty Images 5/14 Protesters against Donald Trump's visit AP 6/14 Protesters deface portraits of Donald Trump and Rodrigo Duterte AP 7/14 Protesters clash with anti-riot police officers as they try to march towards the U.S. embassy REUTERS 8/14 A mural bearing the image of Donald Trump and Rodrigo Duterte is burnt REUTERS 9/14 Activists march on a road leading to the US embassy during a protest in Manila EPA 10/14 Protesters scuffle with riot police AFP/Getty Images 11/14 Protesters shout anti-US slogans as they burn a banner featuring the image of US President Donald Trump AFP/Getty Images 12/14 Activists clash with riot police EPA 13/14 Protesters display placards as they shout anti-US slogans AFP/Getty Images 14/14 Anti-riot police officers block protesters REUTERS

That has included making a public statement about immigration after Mr Trump announced that he would suspend the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program. Mr Obama’s administration developed that programme, which gave temporary deportation relief for young undocumented immigrants who came to the United States when they were young.

Mr Obama has also blasted Republicans since leaving office after they unveiled proposals to repeal his signature healthcare law, the Affordable Care Act, and has critiqued Mr Trump for pulling the United States out of the Paris Climate Change Accord.

We’ll tell you what’s true. You can form your own view.

At The Independent, no one tells us what to write. That’s why, in an era of political lies and Brexit bias, more readers are turning to an independent source. Subscribe from just 15p a day for extra exclusives, events and ebooks – all with no ads.

Subscribe now