The New England Patriots don't have a first round pick, but they are in a position to acquire a first round talent- without having to trade to trade up.

MMQB's Peter King spoke with ten high ranking personnel decision makers around the league and they all pointed towards the equal level of talent in this draft that could benefit the Patriots with their two picks at the bottom of the second round.

"Twenty-five to 55 is the same player, to me," one said.

"Eleven to 40 is the same guy," echoed another.

"To us, 18 to 48 you can get the same player," said yet another decision maker.

"Load me up with twos and threes in this draft," a fourth agreed. "That's where I'd want a lot of picks."

"It's the kind of draft where the 50th player on some team's board will be the 17th player on another team," draft evaluator Gil Brandt said. "And the 17th player on the first team could be the 50th on that other team."

This isn't to say that the players available at the end of the first round in this draft would be the equivalent to players at the end of the first in any other draft. The 2016 draft class is incredibly short on top tier talent, but the depth in the next tier of players is outstanding.

One evaluator told King that he thinks there are 90 immediate impact players on defense in the draft, versus just 40 impact offensive players. It's easy to agree with this evaluation, and it points towards the Patriots likely having to use an earlier draft pick on the offensive side of the ball if they want to leave with one of the top players.

The Patriots currently have the 60th and 61st picks in the draft, both at the end of the 2nd round.

New England wasn't expecting 2015 first round pick defensive tackle Malcom Brown to be available last year because Brown was projected to be a top 20 selection. If any player slips down the board this year, the Patriots will be in position to pounce.

The following players are fringe first round candidates that could interest the Patriots and could be available towards the end of the second round:

Running back: Alabama's Derrick Henry Wide receiver: Ohio State's Michael Thomas, Rutgers' Leonte Carroo, Oklahoma's Sterling Shepard, Pittsburgh's Tyler Boyd Tight end: Arkansas' Hunter Henry Offensive tackle: Unfortunately this is a weak offensive tackle class outside of the top five prospects. Edge defender: Florida's Jonathan Bullard, Michigan State's Shilique Calhoun, Georgia's Leonard Floyd Defensive tackle: Penn State's Austin Johnson, Mississippi State's Chris Jones, Louisiana Tech's Vernon Butler, UCLA's Kenny Clark, Ohio State's Adolphus Washington Cornerback: Virginia Tech's Kendall Fuller

If any of these players are still on the board after the 50th pick, don't be surprised if the Patriots start making some phone calls to potentially move up the draft board.