WHAT on earth is happen-PING here?

Firefighters had to rescue a bungling Black Country prankster after he 'cemented' his head in ... a MICROWAVE.

The YouTube joker decided to make a mould of his head using Polyfilla – but his plans went disastrously wrong.

Because, when the mixture set faster than they expected, he was trapped in the oven.

His friends tried for 90 minutes to free the Wolverhampton man, but in vain.

They kept him from suffocating by feeding an air tube into the 22-year-old’s mouth.

Then, fearing the worst, they finally raised the alarm, and called for an ambulance.

Paramedics alerted the fire service, and a crew spent an hour trying to free the trickster. Firefighters found him with the microwave still firmly stuck on his head, in the garage of a house in Fordhouses.

But it proved a mission impossible. In the end, they had to call colleagues from Technical Rescue for specialist advice.

The five-man crew then had to use a screwdriver to dislodge the Pollyfilla close to his head, eventually freeing him.

Watch Commander Shaun Dakin, who responded to the incident, said: “As funny as this sounds, this young man could quite easily have suffocated or have been seriously injured.

“He and a group of friends had mixed seven bags of Polyfilla which they then poured around his head, which was protected by a plastic bag inside the microwave.

“The oven was being used as a mould, and wasn’t plugged in, but the mixture quickly set hard.

“By the time we were called, they’d already been trying to free him for an hour and a half.”

Watch Commander Dakin added: “Taking the microwave apart was tricky, because a lot of it was welded. We video-called our Technical Rescue colleagues for advice and eventually managed to get him unstuck.

You are viewing an Accelerated Mobile Page. This embedded content is not currently supported. See it here

“He was very relieved when we removed a large chunk of the Polyfilla with a screwdriver, allowing him to breathe more easily. But we had to be extremely careful with the screwdriver, working so closely to his head.

“It took us nearly an hour to free him. All of the group involved were very apologetic, but this was clearly a call-out which might have prevented us from helping someone else in genuine, accidental need.”