Bike racks to be installed in downtown El Segundo

Downtown El Segundo is about to become more bike-friendly.

The City Council Tuesday night unanimously approved the installation of 40 bike racks at 25 spots along Main Street and Grand Avenue, with possible later expansion to Richmond Street and El Segundo Beach.

Meredith Petit, the city’s recreation superintendent, told the council that the idea grew out of a request from a downtown business owner. As city staff surveyed existing bike racks, they realized that racks were few and far between – and quite old.

“These bike racks are outdated, unsightly, and certainly lack consistency in the look or design,” Petit told the council.

City analyst Vina Ramos was able to find and successfully apply for $9,700 in funding from Metro to pay for the racks. Installation will be undertaken in an estimated 40 to 65 days by public works staff.

Petit said the advantages of the racks extend beyond the obvious convenience for bicyclists. Some of the black metal racks will be emblazoned with a city logo to better brand downtown El Segundo, while the increased accessibility of the area to bicycles – in conjunction with the South Bay Bicycle Master Plan, which will add more than 200 miles of bike trails and lanes – is expected to reduce traffic congestion.

“It could encourage bicycling as an alternate mode of transportation in terms of being economically viable and environmentally responsible,” Petit said.

Councilwoman Marie Fellhauer suggested possibly working the El Segundo Blue Butterfly into the logo. “Not that I’ve ever seen a Blue Butterfly,” she said. “But that is our town symbol.”

Mayor Bill Fisher applauded the project, which has involved the public works, planning and building safety, and recreation and parks departments. He said downtown businesses have likewise contacted him about the lack of racks, in particular one businessman who cycles to work but can’t find a place to lock his bike.

“I think it’s great,” Fisher said. “This helps our downtown businesses…and goes towards all sorts of things, health and getting folks into downtown.”