It was going to happen sooner or later: Playboy’s plans to open clubs in Goa are facing opposition from local politicians.

Michael Lobo, a member of the state assembly for Goa’s ruling Bharatiya Janata Party, is leading the crusade against Playboy, saying he will go on hunger strike if the local government gives the adult entertainment brand a green light to open clubs in his home state.

"Playboy is nothing but a glorified dance bar or a glorified prostitution joint," an enraged Mr. Lobo told India Real Time. He is worried the Playboy Clubs will somewhat turn Goa – already popular with partygoers from around the world – into a “sex tourism destination.”

If the clubs open, "families won't come here," he said.

As many as 120 Playboy-branded clubs, hotels, fashion bars and cafés are set to open in India over the next 10 years, starting with clubs in Goa at some point this year. The location for the first Playboy Club is Calangute – the Goa constituency Mr. Lobo is from.

Mounting political opposition to Playboy may thwart these plans.

Wilfred Mesquita, a spokesman for the BJP in Goa, said: “Anything which affects the morality and culture of Goa will be opposed by the party. If this Playboy is the same Playboy which is abroad, then we will definitely oppose it." He added his party is looking into what form the Playboy Clubs would take in India, and respond accordingly.

Subhash Shirodkar, a senior member of the rival Congress party in Goa, said his party is opposed to Playboy Clubs.

Adult entertainment is widely frowned upon in India. This is the key reason why Playboy magazine isn't even permitted on local newsstands.

In keeping with local cultural sensitivities, the Playboy brand has been significantly toned down in India.

For instance, Playboy bunnies in India will show less skin, says Sanjay Gupta, chief executive officer of PB Lifestyle Ltd., a Mumbai-based company that has an exclusive license to market Playboy merchandise and to set up and manage clubs here.

The original bunny suit – the outfit worn by waitresses in Playboy Clubs– has been modified to suit Indian sensibilities.

"Playboy bunnies are integral to Playboy clubs and we have told them that we have toned down the bunny outfit," Mr. Gupta told India Real Time. In India the so-called “bunnies” will wear full-length sheer skirts and tube tops.

"We filed an affidavit to the government categorically stating that as far as our club format goes, there is definitely no vulgarity," Mr. Gupta told India Real Time. PB Lifestyle is unrelated to the empire of Playboy magazine founder Hugh Hefner.

Failure to secure a license from Goa’s tourism department has already delayed the opening of the first club by several months. But Mr. Gupta is confident that the company will secure the license it needs from Goa’s tourism department.

Dilip Parulekar, Goa’s tourism minister, told India Real Time he will discuss the Playboy license this weekend with chief minister Manohar Parrikar.

Previously, Mr. Lobo has crusaded against dance bars in his constituency. He said he got 14 dance bars, a front for prostitution which is illegal in India, to shut down.

Follow India Real Time on Twitter @indiarealtime.

Playboy CEO Discusses the Future of Playboy



Hugh Hefner on His Girlfriends, Son and Movie