After the recent crackdown on Torrentz and KickassTorrents, it seems like it’s time for Pirate Bay to face the music from rights holders around the world. The site has become the freshest victim of copyright laws and may be blocked in Australia before Christmas! This has prompted torrenters in Australia to search for alternatives to Pirate Bay.

The Federal Court of Australia has passed a landmark decision that will prompt all internet providers operating within the country to block five “copyright-infringing” websites. The list includes Pirate Bay among other popular torrent-indexing websites.

The federal Court gave ISPs just 15 days to make sure that the sites are blocked. Other torrent-indexing websites that will be blocked as per the ruling of the Federal Court include Torrentz, TorrentHound, IsoHunt, SolarMovie.

However, it is the shutdown of Pirate Bay in Australia that has many torrenters worrying about how they’ll spend their holidays. However, where one door shuts down, many more open up!

One of the best ways to circumvent this ban is to use a fast, reliable and affordable virtual private network (VPN) connection. While in Australia, you can still access The Pirate Bay with Australia VPN.

A VPN not only masks the IP address of the internet user, but also makes you anonymous online, thus facilitating you to download torrents anonymously in Australia. To get the best torrenting experience, Sign up for Ivacy, the best VPN service for Australia now.

Looking for the Pirate Bay Alternatives? Here are the top 5 Pirate Bay alternatives that will make your holiday season an exciting one!

Top 5 The Pirate Bay Alternatives

Here are the top 5 Pirate Bay Alternatives that are still live and kicking!

1337x YTS Lime Torrents RARBG Zooqle

1. 1337x

1337x happens to be one of the notable torrent websites and was launched in the year 2007. It garnered traction when the major torrent websites started to come under fire. People wanted a fall back plan and there it was, 1337x! The dedicated set of users and uploaders keep the site fresh and up-to-date with content.

Be sure to hide your IP with Be sure to hide your IP with Ivacy VPN before downloding torrents.

2. YTS