Mindless Self Indulgence fans rejoice. PINK, the long-rumored, elusive “lost” album from your favorite electro-punk anarchists will finally see the light of day on September 18th through Metropolis Records. Serving as a “prequel” to all you know about the band, this retro 1990’s album fills in the blanks of MSI’s mysterious early days.

PINK contains nineteen tracks which includes fifteen never-before-heard MSI songs plus four tracks off the self-titled EP. The album also features wild versions of Depeche Mode’s “Personal Jesus” and Duran Duran’s “Girls On Film”, a hidden song, plus an audio diary from 22 year-old Jimmy Urine, a picture anatomy of what you need to make an MSI song, retro 90’s album art, and finally – after 20 years – the reveal of the origin of the name of the band.

“Before there was Rebel… before there was Frankenstein Girls… before there was Tight… there was Pink! The MSI prequel to it all,” said the band’s supreme leader Jimmy Urine. “This album was written by twenty-something Little Jimmy Urine and produced by forty-something Little Jimmy Urine, and its the lost puzzle piece in the formation of the unique MSI sound that would eventually piss off millions of people. The songs on this record are not in chronological order because I don’t know what the word ‘chronological’ means so I just put them in order of ‘what Jimmy likes the fucking best’! And now the lost record you begged for is the reality you will regret…”

PINK can be pre-ordered NOW in all formats including a limited edition, 500-piece run of pink vinyl.

About MSI

Mindless Self Indulgence formed in New York City in 1997 and quickly made their mark with an inflammatory, indefinable hybrid sound that portended a lot of rock music to come. MSI has released five studio albums to date, cracked the Top 5 on Billboard’s Dance chart seven times (with four #1’s!) performed with the likes of Rammstein, Linkin Park, System of a Down, My Chemical Romance and The Dresden Dolls, and maintains one of the most devout and intense global fan bases in music through constant international touring and energetic live performances. MSI returned to the spotlight in 2013 with their first album in five years, the epic How I Learned To Stop Giving A Shit And Love Mindless Self Indulgence, and last year released the remix collection Fuck Machine.

Please follow and like us: