Day 6

Team NB vs SK Telecom T1 S

Match 1

SKTS Picks: Renekton, Evelynn, Orianna, Vayne, Sona

SKTS Bans: Anivia, Annie, Sivir

NB Picks: Singed, Lee Sin, Zed, Lucian, Soraka

NB Bans: Elise, Syndra, Rengar

NB’s duo lane went top to make 2v1 lanes at game start, Pony took starfall first to almost immediately push the wave into the turret. H0R0 roamed top immediately after taking double buffs and secured first blood on asd. Both junglers moved to support top lane, resulting in SKTS taking bottom turret shortly before NB could reply with top turret. SKTS then roamed into NB’s blue jungle and stole the buff followed by the first dragon. SKTS then roamed into NB’s Red jungle, killing Longpanda and taking that buff as well. Both teams moved to dragon as it respawned.

SKTS took the dragon then engaged, taking a 5/0 teamfight followed by the 1st and 2nd mid turrets. NB immediately rushed mid to attempt to reply with SKTS mid turret. SKTS engaged and took a 3/0 teamfight followed by NB’s mid inhibitor, trading for their bottom turret to Elf’s split push. SKTS then roamed top, took 2 more unanswered kills and the 2nd top turret. Then bottom another kill and the 2nd bottom turret. NB attempted an engagement as SKTS sieged bottom but SKTS took 4 more kills and closed out the game.

Match 2

NB Picks: Renekton, Elise, Orianna, Ezreal, Annie

NB Bans: Syndra, Rengar, Kassadin

SKTS Picks: Rumble, Lee Sin, Zed, Lucian, Taric

SKTS Bans: Sivir, Evelyn, Gragas

The teams started standard lanes. H0R0 ganked top just before 6 minutes but minjae and Elf followed up, ending in a 2/1 fight for NB. BANG and Wolf dove asd and pony, forcing them out of lane, allowing H0R0 and Wolf to take dragon while bottom lane was empty. Just before dragon respawned, both junglers ganked bottom, resulting in a 3/1 fight, bottom turret, and a second dragon for SKTS. Your members of NB grouped up mid, potentially to gank, but left when Easyhoon backed off, allowing Easyhoon to take mid turret for free.

SKTS ganked bottom just before 20 minutes, trading 2nd bottom turret for their top turret after a 1/1 fight. NB moved to mid turret to kill Wolf then pushed into their red jungle and were ambushed by SKTS. SKTS came out of the fight 4/0 then took their third dragon while MaRin destroyed top turret. Both teams moved to mid lane, SKTS killed pony in a pick and both teams engaged, resulting in a total 4/3 teamfight for SKTS. Both teams returned mid, SKTS got a pick on asd then took 2nd mid turret. SKTS moved toward Baron to set up a pick.

MaRin baited an engagement that resulted in a 1/0 teamfight for SKTS after which they took baron and began to split push all three lanes. Easyhoon quickly took 2nd top turret then SKTS began a prolonged siege, bring NB’s mid and bottom inhibitor turrets low before baron buff expired. After backing to buy, SKTS split push mid and bottom lanes. After scoring a kill on pony, SKTS took both turrets and mid inhibitor before NB engaged. SKTS came out of the fight 4/1 and took the Nexus.

KT Rolster Bullets vs NaJin Black Sword

Match 1

Bullets Picks: Lee Sin, Elise, Nidalee, Ezreal, Leona

Bullets Bans: Lucian, Mundo, Annie

Sword Picks: Rengar, Olaf. Syndra, Vayne, Sona

Sword Bans: Kassadin, Sivir, Evelynn

Teams began with 2v1 lane, Swords duo going top. At 6 minutes KaKAO moved to the tribush behind Expession’s turret and placed a ward for InSec to teleport in. Expession read the dive and backed off just in time. Bullets traded their top turret for the first dragon. Sword switched their duo lanes bottom to allow Expession to farm the empty lane. When dragon respawned, Bullets ran interference while KaKAO soloed it. Bullets then pushed Sword out of their blue jungle and took bottom turret.

inSec was caught invading Sword’s red jungle but escaped into mid lane and finished off a kill on Peng. Bullets then returned mid to siege and took mid turret. Sword attempted to take the next dragon but Bullets catch and kill Expession then take their third dragon of the game. Bullets begin moving around Baron to deny vision, ultimately taking top turret while Sword piles in to take their mid turret. Bullets traveled to bottom lane to siege the 2nd turret.

After an engage by Sword resulting in no deaths, Sword was forced to back while Bullets took the turret. KaKAO then secured Bullet’s fourth dragon. InSec started farming bottom lane, baiting out 3 members of Sword to attempt a gank while his team began Baron. After avoiding all of Sword's abilities, InSec teleported to Baron to take the objective. Bullets used the buff to rapidly secure the 2nd mid and top turrets. Sword attempted to engage mid lane ending in a perfect 5/0 teamfight for Bullets. Bullets capitalized on the fight and pushed mid all the way to the Nexus.

Match 2

Sword Picks: Rengar, Evelynn, Syndra, Twitch, Sona

Sword Bans: Lee Sin, Kassadin, Lucian

Bullets Picks: Olaf, Elise, Orianna, Ezreal, Taric

Bullets Bans: Mundo, Annie, Sivir

Sword late invaded Bullets blue buff at level 1 resulting in a stand off. Mafa attempted an engage which ultimately resulted in PraY getting first blood. With the number advantage, Watch stole Bullets blue and secured a large cs lead for both Sword’s solo lanes. Bullets duo lane moved top while Sword stayed bottom, resulting in 2v1 lanes. Sword took bottom turret then rotated to take the first dragon while Bullets took top turret and stole Sword’s blue. Sword repeatedly ganked Ryu mid, either killing him or pushing him out of lane to put him further behind after his deficit from level 1.

Sword eventually took mid turret off of the pressure then rotated top to kill InSec. Sword took their second dragon when it respawned with no contest from Bullets. An engagement by Bullets in bottom lane leads to an extended 2/2 teamfight. Sword picked up 2 more kills before both teams moved toward the next dragon. Bullets contested, killed Expession, and took the third dragon. Sword made repeated successful picks on KaKAO which they attempt to convert into Baron.

The first attempt resulted in Bullets rushing mid turret and taking it out from under Sword, although Sword was able to secure the fourth dragon. The second attempt resulted in a 3/3 teamfight. After both teams respawned, Bullets rushed Baron and secured it for themselves then engaged on Sword but losing the resulting teamfight. Bullets returned and took dragon then rotated to also secure bottom turret. Sword attempted to siege mid turret but KaKAO initiated on Peng for a 3/0 teamfight for Bullets who pushed all the way in to take Sword’s mid inhibitor.

Both teams returned mid and Sword attempted another engagement. Bullets won the teamfight 4/0 then pushed in and took the Nexus.

Day 7

CJ Entus Frost vs JinAir Falcons

Match 1

Falcons Picks: Renekton, Elise, Tryndamere, Ezreal, Karma

Falcons Bans: Nunu, Rengar, Sivir

Frost Picks: Mundo, Olaf, Kayle, Vayne, Taric

Frost Bans: Shyvana, Annie, Lucian

Frost invaded Falcon’s blue, resulting in the teams trading blue buffs and 2v1 lane matchups with Frost’s duo going top. Falcons’ duo took their turret first in bottom lane at 7 minutes. Roar forced Shy out of lane, allowing Falcons to safely secure the first dragon at 9 minutes. At 10 minutes, Frost finally took top turret while Falcons took the 2nd bottom turret. ActScene ganked middle, pushing MakNoon back while Falcons entire team grouped mid, taking mid turret at 11 minutes and almost destroying the 2nd mid turret while Frost took the 2nd top turret. Space and Reapered both rotated bottom to split push while the rest of their teams went top. Falcons sieged Frost’s turret until Frost engaged 4v4 and MakNoon took first blood at 14 minutes. Reapered rotated top to split push against shy as both teams roamed to dragon, Falcons securing their second dragon at 16 minutes. Frost ganked Reapered and killed him 3v1 while Falcons group mid and took 2nd mid turret, ending in a trade as MakNoon took bottom turret solo.

At 21 minutes Falcons took control of vision around Baron and waited for a pick. Falcons ambushed Helios and forced out his Ragnarok and Ghost to get away then began Baron while MakNoon and Space were taking dragon. shy and Madlife rushed the pit and shy killed starlast as Falcons took Baron. The teams fought and Frost won the fight 4/2 but were too low to take an objective. Upon respawning, Falcons rushed top and took top turret at 24 minutes then attempted to push in and group siege the 2nd turret. Frost engaged once again, winning another 4/2 teamfight.

Frost grouped mid at 27 minutes with shy split pushing bottom. MiSo was caught out a killed and Frost immediately took mid turret. MakNoon roamed bot to join shy and both lanes dove Falcons, Reapered dying bottom but no turrets taken. Frost backed off and took their second dragon. shy remained bottom, forcing Reapered to stay with him while the rest of Frost started clearing Baron area. shy baited Reapered into an all in, allowing Space to roam bottom and take the kill. Frost then moved to Baron. Falcons engaged and shy teleported into the fight from bottom lane. Frost killed MiSo and took Baron then piled in mid lane, taking 2nd mid turret then 2nd bottom turret and group sieging the lane. Falcons engaged again, Frost taking the teamfight 2/1 as well as mid and bottom inhibitors before backing off, securing their third dragon, and buying.

Frost pushed in mid lane, took the final inhibitor at 38 minutes and scored 3 more kills before taking the Nexus.

Match 2

Frost Picks: Shen, Elise, Kassadin, Ezreal, Taric

Frost Bans: Sivir, Annie, Shyvana

Falcons Picks: Lissandra, Riven, Tryndamere, Lucian, Karma

Falcons Bans: Mundo, Kayle, Olaf

Frost unsuccessfully attempted to late invade Falcons’ blue. Teams moved into standard lane matchups with duo lanes top. ActScene invaded red with Reapered, scoring first blood on Helios and stealing red. Both junglers ganked mid at 6 minutes, ending with a double kill for Reapered. As Frosts blue respawned, Actscene invaded with Falcons’ duo lane, stealing blue and killing Helios and Space while Reapered killed MakNoon under tower when he attempted to assist. MakNoon and shy switched lanes while Reapered and ActScene took the first dragon at 10 minutes. Meanwhile, MiSo teleported top and killed Frost’s duo lane 3v2, taking the score to 8/0 then securing the top turret.

Both duo lanes rotated bottom, ActScene showing up in lane 2 minutes later and pushing Frost out while they took bottom turret. Frosts 3 man dove Reapered top, killing him then taking the turret while the remainder of Falcons traded for Frost’s mid turret. Frost managed to pick Roar as he was withdrawing from bottom then pushed in the lane and 5v4 dove bottom turret, losing the fight to Falcons 5/2 while Reapered took 2nd top turret.

After respawning, Falcons went directly to Baron and snuck the objective at 16 minutes. Falcons immediately ambushed Frost with the buff, resulting in a 3/0 teamfight, and then rotated to take their second dragon. Reapered moved to bottom and pushed to the 2nd turret to set up for a 5v4 tower dive, taking 2 kills and then 2nd bottom turret. When Frost respawned, Falcons dove again, taking another kill and the bottom inhibitor. The kill gap grew to 19/4.

MakNoon was ambushed and killed in top lane, allowing Falcons to 5 man siege mid, taking another kill and the mid inhibitor at 21 minutes. With both inhibitors down, Falcons rotated to top lane with Tryndamere split pushing bottom. Frost engaged under top turret 5v4 and won a 4/1 teamfight while minions destroyed one of the Nexus turrets. Falcons respawned and took their second Baron then pushed in to retake bottom and mid inhibitors before returning to siege top lane. Falcons engaged under turret for a 5/2 teamfight and the Nexus.

Day 8

SK Telecom T1 K vs CJ Entus Blaze

Match 1

SKTK Picks: Shyvana, Olaf, Gragas, Sivir, Lulu

SKTK Bans: Annie, Lee Sin, Caitlyn

Blaze Picks: Rengar, Mundo, Lucian, Thresh

Blaze Bans: Taric, Elise, Evelynn

Blaze invaded blue buff, forcing SKTK to trade for their buff. The lanes began with 2v1 matchups with Blaze’s duo lane going top. Both junglers moved to support their 1v2 lane, DayDream scoring first blood on Piglet before 4 minutes. After another unsuccessful gank bottom, SKTK’s duo lane froze the lane to farm under their turret while Blaze continued to pressure the tower top.

SKTK 3 man dove and killed Ambition mid just before 9 minutes.They then moved toward dragon to bait a check and scored another kill on LustBoy before taking the first dragon, trading for their top turret at 10 minutes.

After securing top turret, Blaze’s duo lane rotated bottom for a 2v2 matchup. Bengi ganked mid at 13 minutes. Faker killed Ambition and they took mid turret. Impact and Bengi roamed bottom, counterengaging when their duo baited a jungle gank from Blaze. SKTK scored a triple kill bottom while Faker killed Ambition in the river, resulting in a 4/0 fight and a 7/1 kill score at 15 minutes.

Faker killed DayDream in his own jungle, resulting in a skirmish mid that scored 2 more kills for SKTK. SKTK used the number advantage to secure their second dragon. SKTK grouped bottom to push while Impact split push against Flame top. Blaze defends for some time but is forced to respond when Faker starts pushing mid. SKTK killed Pact Jack and took 2nd bottom turret at 22 minutes. Blaze attempted a pick on Impact in the jungle but SKTK took 2nd mid turret then killed DayDream and forced Blaze to retreat, securing SKTK the 2nd top turret as well.

Faker caught Ambition in mid lane at 25 minutes and SKTK sieged mid with a number advantage, forcing Blaze off their turret and taking the mid inhibitor. With a 13/1 kill score and over 15k gold lead for SKTK, Blaze surrendered at 26 minutes.

Match 2

Blaze Picks: Mundo, Xin Zhao, Gragas, Lucian, Taric

Blaze Bans: Anivia, Caitlyn, Lee Sin

SKTK Picks: Rengar, Olaf, Nidalee, Vayne, Nami

SKTK Bans: Sivir, Elise, Evelynn

SKTK invaded Blaze’s red while Blaze invaded SKTK’s blue. Both teams ran into each other in the river on their way into bottom lane, resulting in a 2/1 fight for Blaze with Flame taking Blaze’s red buff back from Bengi. When everyone had returned, the lanes were traditional matchups with duo lanes bottom. Bengi and Impact caught Flame and DayDream stealing SKTK’s wolves and fought, coming out with 2/1 fight for SKTK and giving a double kill and double buffs to Impact. DayDream roamed to bottom at 7 minutes, pushed in the lane and moved to dragon. SKTK contested 4v4. Blaze secured the dragon despite Faker killing DayDream with a spear. Blaze retreated over the wall.

Ambition and DayDream roamed bottom at 11 minutes to tower dive SKTKs duo lane. Faker way caught by the two in the river but escaped, drawing them into the river while Bengi ganked bottom and got a double kill. Flame was forced to cancel his teleport and SKTK took bottom turret. Blaze returned with DayDream and took bottom turret, but Bengi and Faker roamed bottom, killing Blaze’s duo lane yet again. SKTK moved to dragon but Ambition stole it with his ultimate. SKTK’s due lane rotated top, catching Flame teleporting onto his tower with Bengi. They chased Flame down to his 2nd turret but Blaze turned and killed Impact. Bengi and Faker used the distraction to take mid turret. Blaze’s duo lane remained top to keep the 2v2 matchup while Flame rotated to bottom against Impact. Skirmishes broke out in all 3 lanes, resulting in another kill for each team and Ambition taking mid turret.

As dragon respawned, SKTK grouped in the bottom river and secured it at 20 minutes without contest. Blaze grouped top with Flame teleporting in to siege top turret but were repelled by SKTK. Upon respawn, both teams grouped at dragon. Blaze managed to kill Impact then secured their third dragon. Blaze then roamed top, killing Impact again under his turret and taking 2nd top turret before being driven away.

Blazed recalled and SKTK started Baron while top lane pushed. Top turret fell to minions and SKTK left Baron, rotating into Blaze’s blue jungle and forcing them to take the long way around while they took the 2nd top turret. SKTK engaged as the turret fell. During a prolonged fight, SKTK took the top inhibitor and a 2/1 teamfight. Blaze pursued as SKTK backed off, preventing them from recalling and then rotating to Baron to take it while SKTK was too low to contest. Blaze them moved to dragon and secured that as well, obtaining a gold lead.

Despite the active Baron buff on Blaze, SKTK immediately pushed down mid lane and took the 2nd mid turret, making the gold almost dead even at 35 minutes. After Baron buff expired, SKTK began sieging mid lane once again. Blaze engaged, both teams becoming very low and backing off without any kills. Baron respawned and both teams began vying for vision in the river, SKTK securing dragon and Flame split pushing bottom during the contest. SKTK grouped mid and almost destroyed the mid inhibitor turret before Blaze repelled them as SKTK’s 2nd bottom turret dropped to minions. Impact was forced to return to base to deal with the huge minion waves pushing in the side lanes and Blaze started Baron. Impact rushed back and SKTK engaged in Baron pit. Bengi stole Baron and SKTK won the teamfight 3/2. SKTK pushed mid, scored another kill, and took mid and top inhibitors.

With top and mid pushing, SKTK grouped bottom at 45 minutes and took the bottom mid and inhibitor turrets, losing Impact to Blaze during the conflict. SKTK backed off and took another dragon. Blaze’s inhibitors respawned and SKTK returned bottom. Blaze engaged once again. SKTK won the fight 1/0 then took the bottom and mid inhibitors. SKTK backed yet again and Baron respawned. SKTK stood in Baron pit while mid and bottom pushed. Blaze was forced to return to defend and SKTK tok Baron for free at 51 minutes. SKTK took top inhibitor and Blaze engaged. SKTK won the fight 5/1 and took the Nexus at 52 minutes.

Samsung Galaxy Blue vs Incredible Miracle #2

Match 1

IM#2 Picks: Mundo, Elise, Gragas, Vayne, Annie

IM#2 Bans: Lucian, Riven, Sivir

Blue Picks: Rengar, Lee Sin, Orianna, Twitch, Karma

Blue Bans: Nidalee, Olaf, Syndra

IM#2’s duo lane hid to the top bush with PLL to ambush Acorn as he came into lane, forcing out his flash when he went to check the bush. PLL then teleported bottom to make 2v1 lanes with IM#2 in top lane. Spirit took both his buffs then moved top to support Acorn in lane while Reign over stole his jungle then ganked mid to give Kuro first blood at 4 minutes. Blue engaged top, trading Acorn for Ondal 1/1. Blue engaged top once again at 6 minutes, taking a 2/1 trade while their duo lane killed PLL bottom. Spirit roamed down and took the first dragon with Blues duo lane. At 10 minutes IM#2 took top turret while Spirit ganked bottom, scoring another kill on PLL and taking bottom turret for Blue.

With the side towers down, IM#2’s duo lane rotated bottom and Blue’s duo rotated mid. IM#2 attempted to group invade and steal red at 13 minutes but Blue responded, winning a 2/1 teamfight. IM#2 took bottom turret then both teams moved to dragon at 14 minutes. Blue engaged as IM#2 began the objective. IM#2 took the dragon, but Blue took a 5/3 teamfight.

The stream became intermittent at this point. From here in it is only what I could piece together.

At 21 minutes IM#2 grouped mid and attempted to take mid turret. Blue engaged, resulting in a 1/1 teamfight then a re engagement and another 1/1 trade. At some point afterward Blue took mid turret.

At 29 minutes IM#2 attempted Baron. Blue engaged in Baron pit but IM#2 took the teamfight 5/0 and Baron. IM#2 then pushed in to take the mid turret.

AT 31 minutes IM#2 pushed in top while PLL split bottom. IM#2 took 2nd top turret and engaged. Although Blue came away from the fight 1/0, they were all forced to back and IM#2 took a Nexus turret.

At 36 minutes IM#2 engaged on Blue, winning a 4/3 teamfight. IM#2 attempted Baron but PawN stole the buff

At 39 minutes IM#2 engaged on Blue in their base, taking a 4/0 teamfight and the Nexus.

Match 2

Blue Picks: Rengar, Elise, Katarina, Caitlyn, Thresh

Blue Bans: Olaf, Annie, Vayne

IM#2 Picks: Riven, Evelynn, Syndra, Ezreal, Tariic

IM#2 Bans: Lucian, Sivir. Orianna

IM#2 started by giving blue to Kuro while Reign over took red. They then invaded Blue’s blue jungle with 4 members and took first blood on Acorn. IM#2 then moved their duo lane to top to make 2v1 lanes. Deft remained bottom to solo lane against PLL while Heart roamed mid with Spirit. Together with PawN they killed Kuro and gave blue buff to PawN. Reign over ganked bottom twice, the 2nd time resulting in a 1/1 trade. At 6 minutes Spirit ganked mid again and gave another kill to PawN. Acorn roamed at level 6 and ganked mid, taking Kuro very low. When Kuro didn’t back, Blue used the advantage to take the first dragon at 9 minutes.

Reign over ganked bottom yet again at 10 minutes. Spirit counter ganked and the fight ended in a 1/1 trade when BenKyo killed Deft with his ultimate from across the map. Despite an even trade, Blue forced Reign over back and took bottom turret. IM#2 grouped mid and pushed, forcing Blue to defend. BenKyo almost took top turret while Blue was on the defense but Blue roamed top, killed BenKyo, and took top turret for a 2/0 turret score at 15 minutes.

IM#2 moved to dragon and Blue engaged on them. IM#2 took the dragon but Blue won the following teamfight 3/2. Blue scored another pick on PLL in top lane then grouped mid, catching and killing Reign over before taking mid turret at 18 minutes. Acorn pushed top, PawN mid, and the rest of blue bottom until dragon respawned at 21 minutes. Blue’s bottom lane backed to dragon and took their second dragon unopposed. Blue rotated top and attempted to get a pick in IM#2’s red jungle. IM#2 took the fight 2/0 and quickly secured mid turret with their number advantage.

Blue grouped mid again at 27 minutes, diving IM#2 for a 3/1 teamfight and taking 2nd mid turret. Blue then moved to dragon and began taking it. The remaining 2 members of IM#2 attempted to interfere but Blue took the dragon and killed them both for a delayed ace. Both teams grouped mid and Blue engaged and came out of the fight 5/0 and took mid inhibitor then retreated to Baron and took it before IM#2 could reach them.

After recalling, Blue group bottom lane, taking the 2nd turret uncontested. Blue unsuccessfully dove IM#2 under turret, losing PawN, but managed to destroy the bottom inhibitor turret. They then backed and took their third dragon at 35 minutes. Blue returned mid and took both exposed inhibitors then fought IM#2, resulting in no kills. After backing, Blue and IM#2 moved to the newly respawned Baron. Blue waited until the super minions were on the IM#2’s Nexus turrets before starting. Half of IM#2 backed and Blue secured the buff. Blue pushed in, took a 4/1 teamfight, and claimed the Nexus.

Group Standings

Group A Team W/T/L Points SK Telecom T1 K 3/0/0 9 SK Telecom T1 S 1/1/1 4 CJ Entus Blaze 0/1/1 1 Team NB 0/0/2 0 Group B Team W/T/L Points KT Rolster Bullets 1/1/0 4 Samsung Galaxy Blue 0/3/0 3 Najin Black Sword 0/2/1 2 Incredible Miracle #2 0/2/0 2 Group C Team W/T/L Points Samsing Galaxy Ozone 2/0/0 6 NaJin White Shield 1/0/0 3 Alienware Arena 1/0/1 3 Team Dark 0/0/3 0 Group D Team W/T/L Points CJ Entus Frost 1/1/0 4 Xenics Storm 1/0/0 3 JINAIR Greenwings Falcons 0/2/1 2 JINAIR Greenwings Stealths 0/1/1 1

(Click the present to find out what it is!)

Trends

First and foremost, Team Dark was disqualified from OGN Winter since the last article based on their last game vs Ozone in the previous week. As a result, Alienware is automatically considered to have gone 2/0 against them in their scheduled match.

Patch 3.14 was introduced into OGN this week and with it we see some huge shifts in the game. Siege compositions have dropped and split push and teamfight compositions have made their triumphant return. Some new champions have also made it into the upper echelons of pick and ban which I will be going over.

Olaf and Syndra were both reintroduced into gameplay, their bugs having been corrected with the latest patch. Both had extremely high priority in week 1 with 100% and 83% pick ban ratios. Olaf came back in very strong with an 80% pick/ban this week, placing him at 91% overall and maintaining a respectable 60% win ratio after doubling his number of games played. Syndra had a less impressive return with a 60% pick/ban, putting her at 73% overall. This probably shouldn’t come as much of a surprise since her win total remains 0% after quadrupling her games played.

With the new patch come in some crazy pick/ban numbers for a few champions who were unpicked until this week. Sivir came out the strongest with 100% pick ban and 100% win ratio (although she was only let through for a single game). This comes as no surprise as her update makes her extremely slippery and gives her insane waveclear, perfect for the Korean split push meta.

Coming in at a close 2nd was Rengar with a 90% pick/ban, although his in game performance was less impressive (if a bit more informative) at a 50% win/loss over 6 games. He came in as a bit of a surprise despite the large amount of play he has been seeing on the solo queue scene. It seems most of the pro teams love to have him roam the moment he hits 6, trying to gank other lanes with his ultimate.

Tying for 3rd of the newcomers are Taric, Mundo, and Evelyn all at 70% pick/ban. Among these priority picks, Mundo was the surprising champion with a 75% win ratio over 4 games. Next was Taric with a 50% win ratio across 6 games. Finally Evelynn made it through only 2 games and came out with a 50% win ratio. Taric saw a huge buff with 3.14 which gives him great scaling and the ability to absolutlely destroy a lane opponent by shredding their armor and letting his marksman melt them. The vision changes have made an Evelynn an absolute terror. Mundo was a surprise hit and a huge success. Although there were no direct changes to him, the new defensive masteries have made him nearly unkillable and make him a real pain at all stages of the game.

Among the old guard, Elise remains the queen of the pick/ban phase. Still 100% pick/ban three weeks into the season. Although her pick number have been impressive, she did have a rough week on Summoner’s Rift, dropping from a 90% to a 76% win ratio.

Behind the Queen, Lucian remains the prince. After this week he actually shows a small increase in his numbers, rising from 96% to 97% pick/ban and bringing his abysmal 31% to 33%.

Annie remains on the top of the charts as well, dropping ever so slightly to a 94% pick/ban while maintaining her 50% win ratio. Behind her is Lee Sin despite dropping 7% to an 85% pick/ban and losing a bit of his Rift cred by coming perilously close to 50/50 with his 53% win ratio.

Behind Lee is Nid, the new patch and her nerfs throwing her numbers in the dumpster. Nidalee dropped 20% in pick/ban to now sit at 76% pick/ban despite taking her win ratio from 33% to 60% this week. Also suffering is Shyvana, her pick/ban continuing its descent at 56% and her win ratio following right after to 57%

Everyones favorite mid matchup showed up a few more times this week after a dip in week 2. Orianna vs Gragas has now shown up in 18% of all games this season. Orianna came back from a devastating first week and is now 4-2 against Gragas. It looks like the patch hasn’t affected their priority, we will see if Gragas can make a comeback before we hit the Round of 8.