Bronze Age weapons are discovered in field

Andy Nock discovered Bronze Age items in a field in Diss. Picture: Rebecca Murphy Archant

A treasure hunter has made a discovery of two weapons which date back to the Bronze Age.

Share Email this article to a friend To send a link to this page you must be logged in.

Andy Nock's find. A Bronze Age sword. Picture: Andy Nock Andy Nock's find. A Bronze Age sword. Picture: Andy Nock

Andy Nock was searching a field near Diss when he happened upon a spearhead and part of a sword which have both been confirmed by a local finds liaison officer to be around 2,500 years old.

The 54-year-old said since he started the hobby in 1998 he has found Roman coins and pistol balls dating back a couple of hundred years but nothing on this scale.

He said: “I did not realise at the time what it was. It is a great find, really.

“The strange thing about it was the spearhead had wood traces in a handle and it is so strange it has lasted all this time but it has.

Andy Nock's find. A Bronze Age spearhead. Picture: Andy Nock Andy Nock's find. A Bronze Age spearhead. Picture: Andy Nock

“I suspect it could have been a burial site. If the field has been ploughed it could turn up more things.”

Mr Nock, who lives on Ensign

Way in Diss, said he enjoys metal detecting because of the “interesting objects” that can be found.

“There are lots of interesting things out there like buttons and pistol balls,” he said. “Most of the time you find rubbish or you can find coins, which are quite common.

“You can be surprised by what you find in a field. It is interesting and it is a good way to get out and about.”

The items are currently in the possession of the landowner.

Dig into the Bronze Age

The beginning of the Bronze Age in Britain is believed to have begun in 2,000BC.

Although it is not certain, it is thought the new bronze tools and weapons identified with this age were brought over from continental Europe.

The skulls recovered from burial sites from the Bronze Age are different in shape from Stone Age skulls.

This suggests new ideas and new blood were brought over from the continent.

Before coming to Britain, the Bronze Age was prominent in Europe with Crete seen as the centre for bronze trade.

The Bronze Age lasted for almost 1,500 years and was followed by the Iron Age.