Hey everyone,

We’re down to the final minutes of the Kickstarter campaign-- it’s looking like we’re not going to reach our original funding goal. Because the project is not going to be successfully funded, your pledge will be voided and no money will be exchanged.

Thank you all SO MUCH for helping us so far.

Without your support, we couldn't have even dreamed of getting this far. We’re more than happy with the amount of traction and support we've gained from the Kickstarter.

We truly believe in Tower Unite and we will do everything to see its creation. That's why we're currently looking into alternative options to help make the project a reality.

WE'RE GOING TO BE DEVELOPING A NEW CROWD-FUNDING CAMPAIGN

Taking what we've learned from our first crowd-funding campaign, we'll be spending the next couple weeks working on the next one. After that campaign we will be looking into Steam Early Access.

We are very excited about this project and we hope you will follow us in the future and help make Tower Unite a reality. This project can only happen with your help.

You’re probably asking a few questions right now:

What's happening to Tower Unite?

Tower Unite isn't going away, we will press on and do everything we can to make it happen. We will be adjusting the funding target for Tower Unite on our next campaign.

What's happening to GMod Tower?

We will still be running GMod Tower until Tower Unite is released. We will be re-enabling VIP donations during the time we're working on the new campaign. We heard your voice and based on your feedback we've decided that we’re going to create a system to help transfer your GMTower progress to Tower Unite. We will detail that in our next campaign.

HERE’S HOW YOU CAN HELP US RIGHT NOW

Since YOU are the most important part of our campaign, we want to hear what you’re thinking right now. We've set up a survey so we can collect your thoughts and use it as a reference for future decisions.

Please take a moment to fill out our survey at this link: http://goo.gl/forms/J3bdXYAywI

Even the tiniest of comments can help us get an idea.

If you have any more questions, feel free to message us on Kickstarter or tweet @pixeltailgames.

Additionally, we’ve set up a mailing list that will send out occasional emails about the future of the project; it’s a great way to keep caught up with the future of our projects. You can subscribe to the mailing list here: http://www.pixeltailgames.com/newsletter

WHEN WILL THIS ALL HAPPEN?

We can't give exact dates yet, but we will make an announcement soon. Be sure to follow our Twitter, sign up to our mailing list, join our forums, and like us on Facebook.

Here’s some other ways you can keep in touch with us: