This article is a list of military strategies and concepts that are commonly recognized and referenced. Military strategies are methods of arranging and maneuvering large bodies of military forces during armed conflicts.

Offensive strategies [ edit ]

Defensive strategies [ edit ]

Strategic concepts [ edit ]

Center of gravity (military) – The hub of all power and movement on which everything depends, the point at which all energies should be directed

Decisive point – A geographic place, specific key event, critical system, or function that allows commanders to gain a marked advantage over an enemy and greatly influence the outcome of an attack

DIME(FIL) – The elements of national power diplomacy, information, military, and economics, often included are financial, intelligence, and law enforcement see MIDLIFE

Expediency – War is a matter of expedients – von Moltke

Fog, friction, chance – War is characterized by fog, friction, and chance

Golden Bridge – To leave an opponent an opportunity to withdraw in order to not force them to act out of desperation – Sun Tzu

Iron Calculus of War – Resistance = Means x Will – Clausewitz

MIDLIFE – The elements of national power diplomacy, information, military, and economics, often included are financial, intelligence, and law enforcement, see DIME(FIL)

Moral ascendancy – Moral force is the trump card for any military event because as events change the human elements of war remain unchanged – Du Piq

OODA loop – Decision-making occurs in a recurring cycle of observe-orient-decide-act. An entity (whether an individual or an organization) that can process this cycle quickly, observing and reacting to unfolding events more rapidly than an opponent, can thereby "get inside" the opponent's decision cycle and gain the advantage – Boyd

Paradoxical nature – The nature of strategy is a paradoxical and does not follow a linear pattern – Luttwak

Positive ends – The possibility of taking advantage of a new security environment to create conditions for long-term peace – Wass de Czege

Primary Trinity – (1) primordial violence, hatred, and enmity; (2) the play of chance and probability; and (3) war's element of subordination to rational policy – Clausewitz Secondary Trinity – People, Army, and Government – Clausewitz

Principles of war: Objective (Direct every military operation towards a clearly defined, decisive, and attainable objective) Offensive (Seize, retain, and exploit the initiative) Mass (Concentrate combat power at the decisive place and time) Economy of Force (Allocate minimum essential combat power to secondary efforts) Maneuver (place the enemy in a disadvantageous position through the flexible application of combat power) Unity of Command (For every Objective, ensure Unity of effort under one responsible commander) Security (Never permit the enemy to acquire an unexpected advantage) Surprise (Strike the enemy at a time, at a place, or in a manner for which he is unprepared) Simplicity (Prepare clear, uncomplicated plans and clear, concise orders to ensure thorough understanding) – US Army FM 3.0

Systems approach – Nation-states operate like biological organisms composed of discrete systems. These systems included: leadership, organic essentials, infrastructure, population, and the military – Warden

Tipping point – The point at which "the momentum for change becomes unstoppable." – Gladwell

VUCA – Volatility, uncertainty, complexity and ambiguity characterize the strategic environment – U.S. Army War College

Weinberger-Powell Doctrine – A list of questions have to be answered affirmatively before military action is taken by the United States: Is a vital national security interest threatened? Do we have a clear attainable objective? Have the risks and costs been fully and frankly analyzed? Have all other non-violent policy means been fully exhausted? Is there a plausible exit strategy to avoid endless entanglement? Have the consequences of our action been fully considered? Is the action supported by the American people? Do we have genuine broad international support?



Economic concepts [ edit ]

Salaries – Always pay your troops on time.

Asymmetric costs – ensure the cost of enemy losses (or objectives) is at least an order of magnitude higher than the costs of attacking.

Budget like a business – Ensure there is sufficient funds and revenue streams to finish the war.

See also [ edit ]

References [ edit ]

Notes