Update on Nov 7, 2018 : Back to OrgMode. Again.

What I want

Notes app needed.

Must support images and attachments.

Mobile-first. Absolutely need a notes app that syncs across computer and phone. That’s just how I function.

Ideally, there should be a backup option that keeps my notes unlocked if when the app starts degrading a few years from now.

when the app starts degrading a few years from now. OrgMode is ideal, but images cause Emacs scrolling to be wonky on the desktop, and recreating agenda mode on the mobile would be a challenge. But glad to see apps like Orgzly take on it.

Since my blog and books are already in Markdown, it would make sense to just stick to Markdown for notes as well.

What I tried before

Evernote sync was so unreliable that I had stopped using it.

OneNote wouldn’t let me even create an account (would complain about password, regardless of how small or long, how simple or complicated a password I try)

Quiver seemed promising, but the iOS app is still in beta and currently only provides a read-only view to the notes. And it does not support iCloud sync, only third-party sync mechanisms, which is strange for a Mac+iOS app combination.

Currently using Apple Notes. The downside is that exporting notes for publishing / sharing is a pain. For example, I can’t copy a note for sharing as text on messaging platforms like Slack, because it loses all the links and formatting.

Why Bear app

Mac app and iOS app that syncs seamlessly

Markdown CommonMark FTW

CommonMark FTW Real tags

Cross-Note Links (yay, a personal wiki)

Web Clipper that converts a web page into Markdown and saves images as well

Copy to clipboard as Markdown

Export as PDF, image, etc.

Privacy – uses iCloud Sync, no servers of their own

Backup into an open format called textbundle

Beautifully designed app by an Italy-based studio

Why not Bear app

No web version, esp. to access from my Linux laptop. They are working on it.

Long-term availability? I’m glad they have a subscription model, so that they are encouraged to maintain the app, instead of creating an upgrade treadmill ( I’m looking at you, Alfred app [1]). Worst case, they have a really good backup feature, that also exports attachments. Last time I checked, Evernote does a bad job at this. The “export” menu command only exports the text of the notes as an xml file. How can you not include attachments in the backup?

[1]). Worst case, they have a really good backup feature, that also exports attachments. No Siri integration, not sure if Apple has provided a Siri “intent” for note-taking though.

This is a quick note on why I have started using Bear notes app

[1] Alfred now has a Mega Supporter License with lifetime free upgrades.