One of the toughest jobs in the Twins organization belongs to play-by-play announcer Dick Bremer, the television voice who has been your guide to almost every game of the Twins' disastrous play so far this season. Last week, Bremer talked with Fargo radio personality and newspaper columnist Mike McFeely about what it's been like to bear public witness to the losing streaks and lousy play.

Bremer said that during the homestand before the current one, a Twins player whom he opted not to name, confronted him about some of what's been said on the air.

McFeely quoted Bremer as saying: “I make it a practice to go in the clubhouse every day and go down on the field, so if a player has a complaint about something I’ve said on television they have that opportunity. I was confronted in the clubhouse in the last homestand. I didn’t say what I wanted to say, which was, ‘Well, play better and the commentary will be more positive.’ You can’t mask the fact this team is a quarter of the way through the season with 10 wins.”

That's currently 11 victories, of course, as opposed to 32 losses -- for a historically bad start in franchise history.

Bremer and McFeely also talked about last Tuesday's game at Detroit, when commentator Bert Blyleven criticized Brian Dozier after a failed at-bat and questioned why Phil Hughes left the game after six innings even though he had thrown only 75 pitches. The "shoulder fatigue" response from Hughes hadn't yet been publicized, and Blyleven's curiosity mirrored what many Twins fans watching the game were thinking.

McFeely wrote: "The bad baseball continued Wednesday in another (of course) loss to the Tigers. The Twins made three errors and committed a number of other miscues. Front and center was left-fielder Eddie Rosario, who was pulled from the game in the seventh inning after trying to steal third base with the Twins down four runs. Earlier, Rosario missed a cutoff man and it led to a Tigers run.

"I asked Bremer how he straddles the line of being a team guy and needing to point out mistakes."

You can read his answer, as well as McFeely's complete blog post, here.