Storefront of Merlin's Beard, coming June 4th. (Photo: Emma Ea Ambrose)

In a world where restaurants traditionally serve only food and drink and people typically play board games at home, one couple sought to unite the two diversions.

In less than a month, owners John and Alicia Iles will open Merlin's Beard — a board game library and restaurant — at 1001 Main St.

The Iles are modeling their business off Game Paradise in Indianapolis and The Uncommons board game cafe in New York City. The idea, John Iles said, is to have a place where a wide selection of board games are available and to be able to eat, drink and play with friends. The business will charge a $5 cover to play for as long as customers like. The cover will only apply if you decide to play a game.

In addition to games and refreshments, Merlin's Beard employees will help customers pick an appropriate board game and introduce them to the rules and procedures.

"For people who are not into games, we want to provide a service where we can help you find something you’re interested in and help you learn how to play it so you can have an enjoyable evening," Iles said.

Iles, a mathematics teacher at Logansport High School, said teaching people board games has always been a passion and playing with his wife and their friends is a favorite pastime. The couple used to live in Greater Lafayette, where Iles taught at Harrison High School for six years. He said they are excited to be moving back into a community that is thriving.

Iles said the restaurant's food and drink offerings will be cafe fare — paninis mostly — and beer and wine, once all the permitting comes through. He said they are hoping to source everything as local as possible.

"We’re just trying to be a strong part of the community and support the other businesses in the area," Iles said.

John and Alicia Iles (Photo: Provided by John Iles)

Iles, who is a fan of "sci-fi miniature games," said popular games like Pandemic and Settlers of Catan will be available, as well as more obscure board games. He said the collection will grow as the business does.

Although Merlin's Beard will have a table outside its space for the May 14 Mosey Down Main Street, Iles said they plan to open for the June 4 Mosey.

"We’ll gradually increase what we can offer in terms of food as our different permits come through," Iles said, "but we'll start playing board games June 4."

About Merlin's Beard

The cafe with food, drinks and board games will open June 4 at 1001 Main St. Learn more on Facebook or donate at GoFundMe.

• Facebook: facebook.com/merlinsbeard42.

• GoFundMe page: gofundme.com/merlinsbeard.

Read or Share this story: http://on.jconline.com/270INsR