We all know the feeling.

You lose your friends at a festival, you find yourself at a stage you didn't even know existed, and you realise the only way forward is to hide how insanely out-of-place you feel, by pretending you know and love every track ever released by whoever that band or DJ is on stage.

Now imagine doing that for an entire weekend.

As Wilderness Festival unfolded in rural England this weekend, a priceless photo emerged of a man attempting to do just that. And, to be brutally honest, failing miserably.







David Cameron at Wilderness Festival, popping up in a selfie taken by Labour supporter Vanessa Price. Photo credit: SWNS.com

Unsurprisingly for a politician whose background, career and celebrity set him a world apart from the average festival fan, David Cameron didn't quite manage to blend into the background.

But even the most ardent critic of the former UK Prime Minister would have to admit his photobombing game is strong.

It takes a while to spot him, but finding his distinctly awkward face among the crowd is a triumph reminiscent of picking out Wally (or Waldo, if you're from that part of the world) from a sea of football fans, factory workers or beach-goers.

The fact that no-one around him seems to have noticed he's even there is either real creepy (like, he still exists in bodily form, right?) or further evidence that he's simply not part of the world he's stumbled into.

And to make matters worse – or better, depending on your viewpoint – Cameron also managed to get himself snapped in an affectionate embrace with a supporter of The Worst Man In History.

That's right, Dave, this photo is real and can never be untaken.





Photo credit: Lucy Edwards



Lucy Edwards said she "couldn't have even planned it. Big Dave C in the house, shame he can't read. He was so mad when he saw me walk off with what was on my back."

At least he can console himself with a large glass (is that white wine on the rocks?) and a cheeky cigarette. Couldn't have got away with that as PM, could you Cam?

More like this: