"Oh no, he will," Bellwether cackled through her crooked teeth as she fired the gun. The pellet flew through the air and hit Nit at the back of his neck, right below the ear. He stumbled, and fell to his knees, panic taking over him as he looked frantically around the pit they found themselves in.

"Run, carrots," he gritted his teeth as his eyes began to change. Judy stopped, she looked at Nick as he twisted in an abnormal manner and began to growl hideously.

"You thought I wouldn't check? Please, Judy, your little blueberry trick didn't fool anyone."

Judy began to breathe heavy with fear, she was trapped in a pit with a savage fox, with Nick. He turned to her, crouched down on all fours, he fixed his eyes on her and Judy was frozen. Both the pain in her leg and in her heart was keeping her still, she was about to be killed by her friend, her only friend. Tears began to well in her eyes and her ears drooped, Nick approached and she remained still. She could feel his approach, his eyes staring with such intensity and his breath warming the air around her.

"Please, Nick," she quietly whimpered as he brought his face inches from her own. She waited for it, the shock of his teeth around her neck, of the pain as he ripped her apart and ate her as he was designed to do. But it never happened, his jaws remained closed and his eyes lost their fire, instead he sniffed her. Her head first and then her face, his nose traveled along much of her torso and body as he began to circle her. She watched in a shock that Bellwether shared as the fox circled her with a playful grin, his tail wagging ever so softly.

"What?" was all Bellwether could manage, she turned to one of her cronies and snapped at him. "Get down there and finish them," the ram looked up at her as if she had gone mad.

"There's a fox in there."

"I don't care, and he's obviously not much of a threat," Bellwether walked over and pushed the ram in "So finish them."

As the ram hit the floor of the pit Nick changed, his fury was back and he turned towards the intruder. Stepping in front of the motionless Judy he placed himself between her and the ram, he snarled loudly and began to back up pressing into Judy's chest with his butt. Her eyes widened as the steady pressured forced Judy to the ground and Nick took up a place over her. She was being covered completely by his body as he stood above her and tightened his muscles. The ram stumbled up and faced the duo, putting his hands out in front of him as he approached. Nick tightened, even more, the closer he came, and Judy watched Nick's muscles he had previously kept hidden visibly moved beneath his clothing.

"Now, now fox," the ram said "I don't want to hurt you, why don't you just hand over the bunny and," the ram never finished, instead he charged.

Judy watched from under Nick as the ram barreled for them, they had less than seconds, she went to roll and Nick disappeared from over her. She looked up to see Nick soaring through the air to meet the ram, perhaps it was his savage instinct or what little bit of that cunning mind of his that was still present. Either way, the ram never stood a chance, Nick landed on one of the rams horns and drove him into the ground before going for the throat.

Bellwether watched in horror as nature played out before her and she saw the exact reason she had always feared and hated predators. Below in the pit, Judy watched as well, with a mix of relief and her own sense of fear. She raised herself off the ground and looked up at Bellwether with her hands on her hips, a smug look plastered on her face.

A thought occurred to her and she pondered if it would work if it was possible. She decided there was no harm in trying.

"Nick," she said accompanied by a pat on her thigh "Come."

Dutifully he obeyed and left his kill to trot over to her, his paws leaving red marks in the sand. He stood by her side and began to rub his face against her thigh, nudging her paw in an attempt to coax her into scratching him. She obliged and scratched lightly behind his ear as she turned to Bellwether.

Bellwether was fuming, she looked from the ram to the bloodied fox and the smug rabbit petting it.

"Fine," she said, "If he won't kill you, then I will just do it myself."

"Attempted murder is a serious crime Ms. Bellwether."

"Ha, I am the law, Judy. Look around, you're alone, no one will miss you or your pet."

"Actually Mayor Bellwether, I suggest it is you that should look around," came a deep, accented voice behind her. She turned to see Chief Bogo and what she would assume to be the whole ZPD glaring down at her.

Judy smiled as Bellwether was cuffed and escorted away and the fox beside her, continued his nasal odyssey of her body.

Bogo grinned as his officers took the crooked mayor away, he crossed his arms over his chest triumphantly.

"Good work Officer Hopps, a team will be here to pick up the fox, but you seem to have a handle on things-oh," as he turned he was greeted by a most embarrassing sight.

"Actually could someone, maybe, tranq him, uh, now he-ooh-is -uh-getting a bit too curious," Judy said as Nick buried his nose into her rear and breathed deeply. She silently cursed herself that the smell she was currently shooting out in every direction would only invite him to go further.

"Right, Del Gato, help out officer Hopps."

"Looks like the fox is doing that fine on his own sir," Del Gato said as he pulled out his tranq gun.