Mastermind behind the 9/11 attacks renounces violence and wants to convert his captors to Islam

Khalid Sheikh Mohammed was the self-proclaimed mastermind who planned the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks

He has now released a 36-page manifesto from Guantanamo Bay

Decries 'the so-called War on Terror' and announced his plans to convert all of the non-Muslims involved in the 'kangaroo court' to Islam

Criticizes adultery, same sex relationships, depression, soldier suicides and AIDs all as examples of problems with Western morality



His trial has been a point of controversy since he was charged in 2008



The mastermind of the September 11 terrorist attacks has penned a 36-page manifesto in an effort to convert his lawyers and the judge in the ‘kangaroo court’ to Islam.

Khalid Sheikh Mohammed uses quotes from former presidents George W. Bush and Richard Nixon as argument points in his push against America, ‘the so-called "War on Terror"’ and Christianity.

The manifesto, obtained by The Huffington Post, was the first of three planned parts that the al Qaeda leader has written from inside the most secure portion of Guantanamo Bay where he and other high-value detainees are held.

His new mission: Khalid Sheikh Mohammed (right) wrote the first of a three-part manifesto wherein he describes his desire to convert all of the non-Muslims in the trial process- including his lawyer and judge- to Islam

Mohammed’s statement marks a dramatic change from his earlier statements, as he previously defended the right to use violence in order to spread the word of Islam. Instead, the document attempts to make a more rationalized and philosophical argument.

‘It is my religious duty in dealing with any non-Muslim such as the people in court (the Judge, the prosecution, attorneys, etc.) to invite them to embrace Islam… it is my own belief that Allah will ask me on the Day of Judgment why I did not invite these people to Islam?’ he writes.

‘American crusader soldier men and women join the U.S. army, wear the latest military gear, eat the best food in Iraq and Afghanistan, and play with their play stations... but at the end, the American soldiers’ -writes Khalid Sheikh Mohammed



‘Do not believe those who claim that the Mujahedeen fight infidels to turn them to Islam or that we are fighting you because you practice democracy, freedom, or claim that you uphold human rights. Islam prohibits us to force our religion on any human being but encourages us to invite them with wisdom and fair preaching and to persuade them in the best way.’



The document is written in English as the terrorist attended college in North Carolina and has a strong understanding of the language. He regularly refers to the collective group of those fighting- many times violently- for Islam as the Muhajedeen.

‘I wanted to write these papers in three parts. I had written most of the first part before they took away our laptops that contain the evidence, at the end of 2009. I will later work on to complete the remaining two parts after the government returns our computers soon,’ he wrote.

He teases that the two yet-unwritten chapters will include his justifications for the September 11th terrorist attacks, as well as his views on the ensuing war on terror.

Ongonig: Mohammed was captured in 2003 and he has declared himself to be the mastermind behind the September 11 terrorist attacks that left nearly 3,000 dead- but now he has renounced violence as a means of conversion

‘The second part deals with why the Mujahedeen carried out 9/11 and whether it was a terrorist operation or an act of self-defense sanctioned by every constitution and international laws as the right of everyone whose land is occupied and whose people are attacked,’ he wrote.

The third portion poses a number of questions about the wars that followed which will surely become fodder for conspiracy theorists, as he asks ‘Were they fought to defend freedom and human rights? Women's rights? Or were they fought for the benefits and interests of individuals and corporations?’

While the first few pages focus largely on the sunny interpretation of himself as a messenger of Allah, the manifest spins into a diatribe against Western social ills, slamming the Catholic church, same sex relationships, and greed.

One of the most pointed critiques comes when he uses the high rate of suicide among returning American veterans as a mark against the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan as well as American might.

‘American crusader soldier men and women join the U.S. army, wear the latest military gear, eat the best food in Iraq and Afghanistan, and play with their play stations while their enemies, the poor Muslim can’t find their daily bread or jacket to protect themselves from the harsh snowstorms over Afghanistan mountains, but at the end, the American soldiers go home and commit suicide but the poor man still with his dry bread and black tea lives with his poor wife in their humble muddy house but with happy hearts and souls,’ he wrote.

The legal fight against Khalid Sheikh Mohammed, who is commonly referred to as KSM, formally began in February 2008 when he was charged with organizing the September 11 attacks that killed nearly 3,000 people.

The trial has been plagued by controversies, starting with whether it would be held in a military or civilian court and more recently with the decision to allow Mohammed and his other defendants from wearing soldier’s fatigues in the courtroom.