This Captain America: Civil War comic book cover is just one of the surprises included in Marvel’s January 2016 solicitations

The full Marvel January 2016 solicitations have been released and, over at SuperHeroHype.com, we’ve got a full gallery with more than 100 different comic book cover and official synopses for all the books hitting stores shelves first thing next year. Among a number of different surprises contained in the solicitations is this Captain America: Civil War comic book cover, showing off the key players from the May 6, 2016 release.

Set for release in the United States on May 6, 2016, Captain America: Civil War is directed by Anthony and Joe Russo from a screenplay by Christopher Markus & Stephen McFeely. It is set to feature the return of Chris Evans as Steve Rogers / Captain America, this time joined in his “solo” film by fellow Avengers Robert Downey Jr. as Tony Stark / Iron Man, Scarlett Johansson as Natasha Romanoff / Black Widow, Anthony Mackie as Sam Wilson / Falcon, Paul Bettany as The Vision, Jeremy Renner as Clint Barton / Hawkeye, Don Cheadle as Jim Rhodes/War Machine and Elizabeth Olsen as Wanda Maximoff / Scarlet Witch.

Sebastian Stan will also be back as Bucky Barnes / Winter Soldier alongside Chadwick Boseman as T’Challa / Black Panther, Emily VanCamp as Sharon Carter / Agent 13, Daniel Brühl as Baron Helmut Zemo, Frank Grillo as Brock Rumlow / Crossbones, William Hurt as General Thaddeus “Thunderbolt” Ross, and Paul Rudd as Scott Lang / Ant-Man. The film is also supposed to debut Marvel’s new Spider-Man, played by Tom Holland.

Captain America: Civil War picks up where Avengers: Age of Ultron left off, as Steve Rogers leads the new team of Avengers in their continued efforts to safeguard humanity. After another international incident involving the Avengers results in collateral damage, political pressure mounts to install a system of accountability and a governing body to determine when to enlist the services of the team. The new status quo fractures the Avengers while they try to protect the world from a new and nefarious villain.

Click on the image below to check out everything else arriving from Marvel in January 2016 and let us know in the comments below what you think of this Civil War comic book cover!