The Eagles hosted a number of top quarterback prospects on pre-draft visits this year. It's not hard to see why. Philadelphia clearly planned on drafting one all along and now they're in perfect position to do that after trading up to the No. 2 pick. Signs point to the Birds drafting Carson Wentz with the second overall pick assuming the Rams go with Jared Goff at No. 1.

Whoever the Eagles pick, the Eagles will have clearly done their homework on him. And possibly even more so than other teams looking at quarterbacks. According to one passing prospect, the Eagles are a little more thorough than other teams in their pre-draft visits. Mississippi State quarterback Dak Prescott told NFL.com about his visit to Philly this year.

Pre-draft visits for NFL draft prospects don't tend to vary too much. They buzz into town for a day or less, meet with coaches and team officials, maybe take a quiz on a playbook, meet a few potential future teammates, and head back to the airport.



That changed for Dak Prescott in Philadelphia.



The Eagles put him through a mock press conference to assess his ability to handle tough questions from reporters.



"They wanted to get a feel for how I would represent the team. Obviously as a quarterback, you're going to be the face of an organization, so it was important to them to see how I would react to different questions. That was the most unique thing I've done (at a visit)," Prescott said. It wasn't so much a test of Prescott's postgame demeanor; the mock setting had more of a post-draft feel, as if Prescott was speaking to reporters for the first time after being selected by Philadelphia

This doesn't surprise me one bit. Philly media isn't like media everywhere else in the country. There are always a ton of reporters at Eagles games/practices/etc. They're not afraid to ask tough questions, either. I can imagine why the Eagles would want to see how these prospects might react to their new environment.

This kind of test is especially relevant for a kid like Wentz who grew up and lived in North Dakota all his life. Being a quarterback is about more than just a passer's talent on the field. It's also about how they carry themselves as a leader and face of the franchise.