The Rape Illusion As I have pointed out on numerous occasions, the evidence from a number of sources suggests that the vast majority of rape allegations made to the police in western countries are false. The official research which suggests otherwise is so full of holes and carefully planned biases that it is quite clear that those involved in the research have bent over backwards to distort their findings in order to engender the illusion that false allegations are relatively uncommon. Indeed, the official research is worse than just 'biased', it is almost completely fabricated. And if one takes into account all the evidence relating to rape that is available from many different sources, it becomes fairly obvious that the false allegation rate is extremely high - in my view, close to 80%. However, there remains a strong resistance among people to accepting this point of view, and it is this particular resistance that I wish to address here. This resistance seems to stem mostly from the fact that the vast majority of women whom people know are decent human beings - most of the time - and when you tell such people that 80% of rape allegations are false, they think about the women whom they know and they think, "There is no way that most of the women whom I know would lie about rape." And I am sure that they are totally correct in thinking this. The majority of women would, indeed, not make a false allegation of rape. The majority of women would, indeed, not make a false allegation of rape. But what seems to happen is that people become confused in their minds, and they think that if some 80% of rape allegations are false then it follows that some 80% of women must be prone to making false allegations - and this, they do not accept. But to suggest that 80% of rape allegations are false is not to suggest that 80% of women would make false allegations. The false allegation rate, on its own, has precious little to say about the number of women who would make false allegations. For example, imagine that 100 rape allegations are made to the police throughout the year in the USA and, further, that every single one of them turns out to be false. Well, we have a 100% false allegation rate. Every woman who made an allegation has lied. But there are some 120 million women living in the USA, and so the percentage of women making false allegations (in this case, 100 women) is absolutely miniscule - less than one-thousandth of a percent of the total population of women. Thus, an extremely high false allegation rate (in this case, 100%) does not imply that a large percentage of women are making false allegations. It simply means that a high percentage of those women who are making allegations are making false ones. Now, here in the UK, we have some 15,000 rape allegations made to the police every year. the evidence suggests that some 80% of these allegations are false As far as I am concerned, the evidence suggests that some 80% of these allegations are false, which means that some 12,000 of these allegations are false. (Indeed, 95% of these allegations do not result in any convictions.) Now, given that some 24 million women live in the UK, the fact that some 12,000 of them are making false allegations means that some 0.05% of women are making false allegations - which is a very tiny fraction of the whole population of women. Indeed, at this rate, this would only amount to 1% of women making false allegations over a twenty-year period. In other words, the view that some 80% of rape allegations are false in the UK does not imply that some 80% of women would make false allegations. It simply suggests that some 1% of women are making false rape allegations over a twenty-year period. Is this really so hard to believe given the numerous incentives that are offered to all women who make false allegations? Is this really so hard to believe given the daily bombardment from the media urging women to feel abused and to allege abuse by men? Is this really so hard to believe given the fact that some 5% of women are also seriously impaired emotionally in one way or other - with unprovoked hysteria and aggression being fairly commonplace among such women. And what about the effects of hormones, alcohol, drugs, anger, jealousy, misunderstanding, sheer wickedness? Surely, it is very easy to believe that some 1% of women might make a false allegation over a twenty-year period. are our women so angelic Or are our women so angelic that, despite all the incentives, despite the constant urging, and despite the fact that many are emotionally impaired, it is still actually unthinkable that over a twenty-year period some 1% might stumble into making a false allegation of rape? Indeed, such a low figure would also, in fact, demonstrate just how resilient are UK women to succumbing to the numerous temptations to make a false allegation. After all, only 1% of them will succumb over a twenty-year period. And I do not think that it would be unfair to suggest that these particular women would likely be the most malicious, the most uncaring, the most manipulative, the most dishonest and/or the most emotionally aggressive of all the women who dwell amongst us. And there are, indeed, quite a few women with such characteristics. More than 1% of women would be my guess. Nevertheless, 99% of the entire population of UK women will resist all the incentives and all the temptations to make a false allegation throughout this very long time of twenty years. 99% !!! Not bad. Not bad at all - given all the ups and downs that life brings them. But the assumed false allegation rate which gave us this most heartening result and which demonstrated just how wonderful are our women is, in fact, 80%. the claim that 80% of rape allegations are false does not cast aspersions on the vast majority of women. In summary, therefore, the claim that 80% of rape allegations are false does not cast aspersions on the vast majority of women. It simply implies that a very tiny percentage of women are swamping the system with false allegations of rape; leaving genuine victims struggling to be believed. And all the valid evidence that I have ever seen is consistent with this view. In conclusion: Even if just 1% of UK women make a false allegation of rape over a twenty year period, then this will be sufficient to maintain a whopping 80% false allegation rate throughout the 20 years. And this appalling state of affairs can exist even if 99% of women are as good, and as honest, as a newborn babe. In other words, an 80% false allegation rate can easily be maintained even if 99% of women would not make a false allegation.