FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE – October 7, 2017

ARLINGTON, Va. – The Washington Capitals have hired former Capital Peter Bondra as director of alumni affairs and business development, president of business operations and chief commercial officer of Monumental Sports & Entertainment Jim Van Stone announced today.

“We are thrilled to add a familiar face to our organization,” said Van Stone. “Peter’s contributions to our organization both on and off the ice is remarkable. Peter has always been generous with his time and this is a great opportunity for him to continue to make a positive impact in the community.”



Bondra played in 1,081 NHL games over a 16-season career, scoring 503 goals and 892 points. Bondra played in five All-Star Games and he remains second in Capitals’ franchise history in goals (472) and points (825). Bondra represented Slovakia internationally on multiple occasions, highlighted by a gold medal at the 2002 IIHF World Championship and a bronze medal at the 2003 World Championship. He also played in two Olympics (1998, 2006) and in the World Cup of Hockey (1996). In addition, Bondra served as General Manager for Slovakia’s national team from 2007-11 and as a scout for Team Europe at the 2016 World Cup of Hockey.



“I am excited to join the Capitals in an official capacity,” said Bondra. “Washington has always been my home and I look forward to helping this organization in any way I can.”



In his new role, Bondra will serve as the managing director of the Capitals Alumni Association with a focus on program and event development, alumni recruitment efforts and revenue development. In addition, he will support the Capitals fan development, community relations and MSE Foundation initiatives on various brand events and programs.



Bondra will be available for interviews when the Capitals host Rock the Red Carpet on F Street in front of Capital One Arena from 3:30 p.m. to 5 p.m. today, prior to the Capitals Opening Night presented by GEICO. The Capitals open the 2017-18 season presented by Capital One Bank by hosting the Montreal Canadiens at 7 p.m.



