In a tweet from Tuesday, Marvel artist Chris Bachalo famed for his work on such books as Doctor Strange and Uncanny X-Men, teased a vague new reveal on everybody’s favorite news source, Twitter.

My new raison d'être will be revealed friday during a Marvel comics presentation at a pop culture event taking place in San Diego– — Chris Bachalo (@ShadeX6) July 18, 2017

As you can see, this puts the “vague” in vague reveals. Also, for those who don’t know (and I definitely didn’t just Google this before writing) “raison d’être” means “the most important reason or purpose for someone or something’s existence.” So this will likely be a new comic book he will be working on with Marvel Comics.

As previously stated, he is widely known and loved for his work on X-Men comics and he has recently departed Doctor Strange, making it unlikely that he will be returning to that project. There is the possibility of an all-new title reveal, though there are a myriad of Legacy books on which he could work next. It is my hope that he will be hoping on as the long-term artist on Astonishing X-Men so that the book can stop these rotating artist shenanigans sooner rather than later.

There’s something delightfully auteur about the wording of this announcement. It shows a guy who has fun with his work and clearly has a passion for it.

Tomorrow and Saturday. SDCC. Booth 4419. Approximate hours 12-3 each day. Looking forward to meeting you! — Chris Bachalo (@ShadeX6) July 20, 2017

Bachalo will be at Booth 4419 at SDCC for those who will be attending and want to meet one of the most talented artists at Marvel at the moment.

When we know for sure what his next project will be, we’ll certainly let you know. Unless you’re there and hear it firsthand of course, in which case you’ll know when we do.

Happy Comic Con, people!

About Joshua Davison Josh is a longtime super hero comic fan and an aspiring comic book and fiction writer himself. He also trades in videogames, Star Wars, and Magic: The Gathering, and he is also a budding film buff. He's always been a huge nerd, and he hopes to contribute something of worth to the wider geek culture conversation. He is also happy to announce that he is the new Reviews Editor for Bleeding Cool. Follow on Twitter @joshdavisonbolt.

(Last Updated )

Related Posts

None found