Dorohedoro Ch.151 Abridged

(Slightly) larger versions of pictures can be found HERE.

If you missed it: 150 abridged.

DISCLAIMER: I am NOT fluent in Japanese.

Chapter 151: Dreaming of Another Dimension

Devil Nikaido has asked Kaiman to give her Store’s Kitchen Knife, but he doesn’t want to hand it over.

Devil Nikaido: Give it to me, Kaiman. It’s too heavy for you.

Kaiman: .oO(…How embarrassing!! But I can’t deny that it’s heavy!!)

Kaiman: If you want it, come and take it from me.

Devil Nikaido: Fine.

Asu: It’d be better to hand it over peacefully. This is why humans disgust me.

Magic Users: ………

Zombie Haze: Oogagah.

Devil Nikaido: *poof*

Kaiman: She disappeared!

Devil Nikaido: *comes up behind Kaiman* I didn’t disappear. I’m just moving at high speed.

Kaiman: You… *is grabbed by Devil Nikaido* Eh?

Devil Nikaido: *throws Kaiman in the air* Higher, higher!

Kaiman: UWAAAAH!!

Kaiman: *gets knocked out by ceiling and loses grip on Store’s Kitchen Knife*

Devil Nikaido: *catches both Kaiman and Store’s Kitchen Knife*

Devil Nikaido: .oO(This Kaiman was revived from the head that was submerged in formalin… It has to have been [done by] the me that came from the future… There must’ve been a reason for it…)

Devil Nikaido: .oO(If that’s the case, then I can’t afford to expose Kaiman to danger…)

Kaiman: Umm… Okay, I get it, you can put me down now…

Devil Nikaido: *tosses Kaiman* There you go!

Kaiman: I didn’t say “throw me”!

Asu: It’s useless to argue back and forth.

Zombie Haze: Oogaga.

Kaiman: To Hell with you! I’ll get my face back myself!

Devil Nikaido: Kaiman’s face…? It was changed by Ebisu’s magic… Hm…?

Magic Users: ………

Meanwhile, at Hole’s Central Hospital…

Thirteen: It’s so quiet.

Vaux: We have to drive the magic users out of the hospital!

Note: in the previous chapter, Vaux hurried to get to the hospital before Hole could find the magic users inside to prevent Hole from wrecking the hospital.

Vaux: AHH!

Hole: *peeks out from behind hospital*



En Family Minion: Wh… what’s that……?

Vaux: Shit, he got inside!

En Family Minion: Uwaah!

En Family Minion: *runs* WAAA!!

En Family Minion: *pant pant* Gotta make it to the others… and warn them…

En Family Minion: *looks behind* He’s not here yet… Hm!? What the…

Hole: *bursts up from the floor*

En Family Minion: WAAH!



Hole: *plows through the floor*

En Family Minion: UWAAA!!



Chidaruma: Hole-kun is so reckless and messy…

En Family Minion: Everyone…! Danger…!! Ugh.



Kaiman: *sulking*

Devil Nikaido: Kaiman……

Asu: Nikaido… stop worrying about Kaiman so much. After all, he’s just a human. You are an elite magic user, and now a devil. You are worlds apart.

Kaiman: I can hear all that, you little brat! You’re pissing me off!

Asu: More importantly, we have to come up with a way to retrieve your magic box…

Devil Nikaido: As for that… there’s nothing I need to do… I think.

Asu: What do you mean?

Devil Nikaido: When I used time magic in the Central Department Store, I met my past self inside the Black House… I gave my past self Store’s Kitchen Knife and returned to my own time. Then, according to Kaiman, the past self who I gave the knife to suddenly vanished.

Devil Nikaido: This magic is directed by the self which used it.

Asu: In other words…

Devil Nikaido: For instance… I used the magic at 9 o’clock… and traveled to 20 minutes in the past, to 8:40… So now in that past there were 2 of me: the 9 o’clock self who used the magic, and the 8:40 self.



Devil Nikaido: At that point the past me thought she’d have to fight Haru, but I gave her Store’s Kitchen Knife. I gave it to her to influence her behavior, to change the future… The 9 o’clock self who used the magic returned to 9 o’clock…

Devil Nikaido: But that 9 o’clock was created as the result of changes I made to the past… It was a new 9 o’clock where I didn’t fight Haru…

Devil Nikaido: In that new timeline, the past self who I met with at 8:40 also existed… And naturally, after 20 minutes passed and it became 9 o’clock, there should’ve been 2 Nikaidos at the same time…

Devil Nikaido: But my magic doesn’t allow for that. When the self who used the magic returns to her original time, the other self disappears…

Devil Nikaido: Disappears… or, perhaps it’s more accurate to say that the extra self is integrated…

Asu: Yes, I see, that must be a rule governing your magic. But what does that have to do with getting your magic box back?

Devil Nikaido: There is no doubt that my devil self which came from the future exists. My future self gave my current self some advice…

Devil Nikaido: Then, most likely, she also revived Kaiman from the formalin head…

Asu: What?!

Kaiman: R-revived me…?!

Devil Nikaido: That is to say… my current self is… living within her changed timeline…



~Chapter 152 comes out February 7, 2017 in Japan!~

Poor Vaux is feeling helpless as he watches Hole tear apart his beloved hospital. Poor Kaiman is feeling useless as his best friend far surpassed him in power. All he wants is his human face back. One way to do that is for the magic user that hexed him to die. That magic user is Ebisu, who Chidaruma believes is dead, but could Kaiman’s lizard face be proof that she is alive? And, if so, who else may be alive? Dokuga (and Tetsujo and Risu) better be alive…