The two mayoral candidates for Halifax — Mike Savage and Lil MacPherson — faced off at a public debate tonight ahead of the municipal election on Oct. 15.

Watch the debate on Facebook.

Here are the key issues that came up:

Environment

Many were surprised to learn that Halifax business owner MacPherson chose to run against Savage, the incumbent, since she volunteered for his campaign during the 2012 municipal election.

MacPherson says the environment pushed her to run — she feels there isn't enough happening in the city.

She said attending the signing of the Paris Agreement made her consider the role mayors can play to fight climate change, as well as build the economy.

"The rest of the world is [growing the green economy], but I really feel as an entrepreneur, we're not ready as a city," she told CBC's Mainstreet on Tuesday.

In response, Savage pointed out that under his leadership, the Federation of Canadian Municipalities deemed the Halifax Regional Municipality Canada's Green Champion last year.

"Everything from protecting things like Purcells Cove backlands, moving on Blue Mountain-Birch Cove, and the 100 Wild Islands," Savage listed as his green priorities in council.

Small businesses

During Savage's campaign launch, he denounced the amount of red tape many small businesses face.

"We need to have a better business process," he said Tuesday.

MacPherson agreed, saying her experience of opening three businesses in the municipality was "very tough." She said the current bylaws specifically disadvantage small business owners who don't have the same financial or legal resources as big developers to navigate the complex system.

"The small businesses are just left there to deal with things they don't know how to do," she said.

Development

On the topic of urban planning, Savage said he's working to protect areas that have heritage designation, like Young Avenue, despite the demolition of a historic rental property there earlier this month.

MacPherson expressed concern that development in the municipality is "going too fast too soon."

"It needs to slow down and pause," she said.

Campaign donations

In 2012, Savage faced criticism for not disclosing his campaign donations until after the municipal election. About 30 per cent of those donations came from development companies.

"There's nothing wrong with accepting money from developers, as long as you disclose it," he said.

MacPherson has said she won't be accepting any donations from developers, and is willing to disclose her campaign donors at any stage of the election process.

"I'm very transparent and I'm not accepting any money from developers. I think we should be at arm's length," she said.