I Bought It Affiliate Links

I received the Su:m 37 Skin Saver Melting Cleansing Balm yesterday from 11st (they have an AMAZING international EMS shipping deal right now–check out my Facebook post on how to get the 40,000 won-off coupon; this balm cost 26,000 won plus 2,500 won for domestic shipping and it arrived one week after I placed my order. MAGIC!).

Cleansing balms are soft, sort of grainy-waxy-seeming solids until they hit your skin and get massaged in–at that point they become an oil that slices through your makeup, oil, and face grime and then emulsifies when in contact with water to wash all that nasty away. It’s the first step in my double cleanse (followed by a foaming face wash).

Notable examples include the Banila Co Clean It Zero balm and The Face Shop’s Seed Fermentation Oil Cleansing Balm.

I picked this up for my upcoming (in forever) mega comparison review of oil, oil-gel, and balm cleansers. And also because I wanted it. ahaha

I was wondering about the ingredients, of course. So I translated the ingredient list from Korean into English. I’m not a professional Korean-English translator or even an unprofessional translator (I’ve only passed translation exams in a few European languages, but no Asian languages). I just try my best and welcome translation help. <3 Let me know if you see any errors!

Korean Ingredient List:

하이드로제네이티드폴리데센, 카프릴릭/카프릭트리글리세라이드, 트리에칠헥사노인, 피이지-20글리세릴트리이소스테아레이트,폴리에칠렌, 사이클로헥사실록산, 세틸에칠헥사노에이트, 피이지-30소르비탄테트라올리에이트,아스코빌테트라이소팔미테이트,클루이베로미세스/락토바실러스/아프리코트커넬발효오일여과물, 기름야자오일, 육두구추출물, 오렌지껍질오일, 드럼스틱나무씨오일, 라임오일, 센티드제라늄꽃오일, 한련초추출물, 로즈마리잎오일, 인도멀구슬나무잎추출물, 소듐스테아로일글루타메이트, 시트랄, 시트로넬룰 [this is how it is typed in the list, but the correct Korean spelling seems to be시트로넬롤], 리모넨, 제라니올, 리날룰.

English Ingredient List (done using the Lioele product dictionary):

Hydrogenated Polydecene, Caprylic/Capric Triglyceride, Triethylhexanoin, PEG-20 Glyceryl Triisostearate, Polyethylene, Cyclohexasiloxane, Cetyl Ethylhexanoate, PEG-30 Sorbitan Tetraoleate, Ascorbyl Tetraisopalmitate, Kluyveromyces/Lactobacillus/Apricot Kernel Oil Ferment Filtrate, Elaeis Guineensis (Palm) Oil, Myristica Fragrans (Nutmeg) Extract, Citrus Aurantium Dulcis (Orange) Peel Oil, Moringa Pterygosperma Seed Oil, Citrus Aurantifolia (Lime) Oil, Pelargonium Graveolens Flower Oil, Eclipta Prostrata Extract, Rosmarinus Officinalis (Rosemary) Leaf Oil, Melia Azadirachta Leaf Extract, Sodium Stearoyl Glutamate, Citral, Citronellol, Limonene, Geraniol, Linalool.

Here’s the link to the CosDNA analysis. Guess what? This product (unless the obscure Kluyveromyces/Lactobacillus/Apricot Kernel Oil Ferment Filtrate turns out to be evil, but it’s unlikely) contains no acne or sensitive skin triggers. Holy mother of balm, this product is worth the price.

Updated: find the full review in my roundup of 15 Korean oil cleansers.

Buy it on Amazon.

Disclosure: This post contains affiliate links. Clicking those links before you shop means that fan-b receives a small commission, which helps to support the blog. Please see my full disclosure for more information.