A gentle exfoliating and cleansing regimen is an essential part of regular facial skin care, which is why WODA has designed a cutting-edge, top of the line collection of masks to turn back the clock and reveal your natural glow. WODA’s Magic Bamboo & Charcoal Mask is one of the most popular and versatile masks in this line, offering a deep cleansing experience that aids in reducing the appearance of hyperpigmentation, blemishes, and sunspots. Not only does it contain activated bamboo charcoal known for natural deep cleansing properties, but evening primrose oil and rosehip oil both work in combination to sooth the skin while it exfoliates. Perfect as a gift, or an addition to any anti-aging skin care routine.

When it comes to luxury in facial skin care, WODA Sin Care does not hold back. Legend has it that Cleopatra slept in a pure gold face mask every night to enhance her stunning beauty and complexion. In line with these ancient beauty practices, WODA offers a Celebrity 24 Karat Gold Mask complete with vitamin C to deeply hydrate and revitalize. Along with other luxurious ingredients, this natural face mask is cleverly blended with organic coconut oil and cocoa seed butter, designed to plump and lighten complexions of all types.

It is essential that natural face masks strike a delicate balance between exfoliating and hydrating, which is why WODA’s organic face mask line only includes gentle ingredients crafted with all skin types in mind. Among many other essential ingredients, a delicious combination of pumpkin enzymes, organic rosehip oil, and aloe vera are included in WODA’s Brilliant Enzyme Mask. This crème also contains glycolic acid, which gently exfoliates and eliminates dead skin cells to reveal your natural youthful shine. This mask also offers special organic enzymes that activate modules on the epidermis to increase hydration and glow.

Finally, for blemish-prone or oily skin types, WODA Skin Care offers an all-natural solution, guaranteed not to leave your skin irritated or red. The Clear Skin Anti-Blemish Mask provides a luxurious formula that contains lactic acid, vitamin C, and organic jojoba oil, helping to clear the skin without causing dryness.