Benny Fairfax has one of the smoothest parts in the entire Real Street contest. His style is so effortless he could be asleep at the wheel doing tricks. There are plenty of people that work very hard to attain the nonchalant look in their skating. For Benny, that style just comes naturally. He's having fun and it shows.

Blasting and catching a frontside shove-it like this one is no easy feat. Benny makes it look all too easy. Yoon Sul

Tell us a little about filming for this Real Street video. How did it feel to film for this compared to filming for other video parts you've worked on in the past?

I guess, to be honest, I didn't really find out I was filming for the Real Street thing until the footage actually went to it. I was just out skating and filming like usual.

What filmer/editor did you work with for the Real Street vid and what's you're relationship like with at guy?

I worked mostly with a filmer named Cole Matthews. He is a really good friend of mine. We were born only a week apart. We've been good friends and roommates on and off for about six years now. He is one of my favorite guys to film with, real easy, no pressure. It's just like doing what you normally do when you go out and film with a friend.

Benny navigates a Lego-like ledge setup to ollie over into this backside nosebluntslide with style. Ben Karpinski

What do you think of the whole concept of video part for cash and prizes as opposed to structured contest environments?

It's the best way I think. It's not like you are under some crazy pressure being expected to perform in runs. I think this is how all contests should be run. It's amazing.

Did any one trick or line make for a memorable experience: either a battle or really fun/memorable session?

There was one line I filmed in Orange County where I focused my board. I never do that either. I just got really angry and let myself snap. Afterwards I looked down at my broken board and thought, "I really wish I hadn't done that." I wanted to carry on filming but I had sealed my own fate.

Was there anything you wanted to get for this part that you couldn't?

There was quite a bit. The deadline was looming and I lost my passport and visa so I had to go back to the U.K. to sort all that out. I didn't have as much time as I'd have liked.

Tell me about this passport thing. How did you lose it?

I forgot it in a taxi. My passport is my prized possession and losing it is a big deal. I had to go to the English embassy in Los Angeles to get a temporary passport for about $200. Fly to the U.K. and get my real passport for another $200. Then go to the American embassy in England to get my visa. It was terrible.

Portrait of the skater as a young artist. Benny gets in tune with his inner hippie. Daniel Shimizu

That sounds like the most expensive cab ride ever!

It was. Now I keep my passport in a safe. I can only take it out when I am about to get on an airplane [laughs].

Of the other skaters in the Real Street contest, apart from yourself, who would you put your money on to win the whole thing?

Nick Trappaso for sure.

If you win, what will you do with the $50,000?

I'm pretty sure that I don't have any chance of winning because everyone in the thing is so raw. But if by some miracle I do win I'd probably throw a party mate!

Who would you like to see in next year's Real Street contest?

Nick Trappaso, again. Danny Brady, Andrew Brophy, Raymond Molinar and Clint Peterson.