I feel like Marie Reyes is the Kim D of Real Housewives of Dallas. She brings nothing to the show and does whatever she can to get attention.

Obviously, Marie was the one who spread the story about LeeAnne Locken, and that is the only reason she is getting any screen time on this show. She is not even a Real Housewife and her desperation is just way too much for me to handle. I am definitely not a LeeAnne fan and even I can tell that Marie is an attention-seeking shit stirrer.

Needless to say, I was pretty shocked to watch the RHOD reunion episode and hear that Marie supposedly hired a social media team to take down LeeAnne and Tiffany Hendra. It’s absurd, to me, that she would invest so much thought and money into maintaining some sort of persona.

CLICK “CONTINUE READING” FOR MORE!

I feel silly because I’m giving Marie attention, but I feel like this is too ridiculous not to address. As expected, Marie addressed this in her Bravo blog (which she basically only has to trash LeeAnne).

Marie wrote, “I’ve been accused of having a social media team that attacks LeeAnne and Tiffany, so let me set the record straight. I employ several people who help me with PR for my Signature skin care line RAGS2Riches by Marie Reyes in three different cities and I employ a young man, ONE young Millennial man, who helps me with my businesses’ social media accounts. He also helps me with social media, specifically Twitter, around the airing of this show. Surprise, I’m not the gif or photoshop queen, LOL! So, my social media “team” is a whopping one person (someone has to do the artwork and hit the send button) + me and my husband!” I can’t imagine that many people are hitting up Marie or regularly checking her social media pages for content. This is definitely not something that she needs an employee for. As I keep saying, she’s not even a Real Housewife.

RELATED: LeeAnne Locken Compares Marie Reyes To A Tornado

Plus, there’s the fact that Marie uses her social media to impart negativity and make fun of people: there is nothing at all acceptable about that. Marie attempted to justify this when she wrote, “Yes, in an effort to add colorful context I’ve made fun of people’s on screen words and behaviors. I never made fun of or “attacked” any of the other ladies for anything they’ve done that wasn’t directly related to something aired on the show, nor have I asked anyone else to do so on my behalf.” Anyone who has checked out her social media profiles knows that this is not at all accurate, unless Marie just has a very different version of the word “attacked.”

Then Marie proves once again that she disillusioned by the level of “fame” that she has when she wrote, “The notion that I bought the Internet and or employ trolls to attack anyone on the show is simply ridiculous. By now everyone should know that if I have something to say I’m pretty direct and at no loss for words via my blog or live during my after show periscope.” No one thinks that Marie would be able to “buy the internet.” As far as random trolls go, I bet that they are just a series of accounts that Marie has the password to. And I have no idea who this “everyone” she is referring to in regard to the readers of her social media content and blog. She is not even a Housewife – I can’t stress that enough.

Marie needs to stop trying to bring down others just to get attention. It’s really not a good look on her at all – no matter who is operating the social media accounts. I’m also wondering if she even wrote her Bravo blog entry herself….

TELL US – WHAT DO YOU THINK ABOUT MARIE’S SOCIAL MEDIA ANTICS? DOES SHE THINK THAT SHE’S A BIGGER DEAL THAN SHE ACTUALLY IS?

[Photo Credits: Bravo]