Lisk, the blockchain application platform, has collaborated with distinguished design agency Taikonauten, in order to rebrand its ecosystem.



With this partnership, the startup particularly aims to enhance the user experience and facilitate even greater user adoption. This collaboration is part of Lisk’s resilience phase, which aims to build a more elegant core system, an even better Lisk SDK, deploy various useful features, design beautiful and easy user interfaces, and continue to put a major focus on security.



“This collaboration will help the Lisk project more efficiently to communicate the goals of our platform. It will improve the user experience of the Lisk client to a level not seen before in the blockchain space, marking a first step for common user adoption, and unifying our whole ecosystem visually,” Lisk Foundation President Max Kordek said.



Taikonauten is a Berlin-based design agency that aims to shape the future of the Internet with its work. It uses digital design to promote key brands, position products and create new opportunities for cutting-edge businesses.



Lisk will allow users to develop applications from scratch using JavaScript by deploying sidechains next to the Lisk blockchain. Registered in December 2016, the Lisk Foundation has a permanent mission to enable the project to develop into a widely used, next generation, blockchain application platform set out by its Founders.



In its official release, Lisk said that the partnership will enable the Lisk Foundation to employ the creative talents of the team at Taikonauten to entirely redesign crucial aspects of its platform, such as its logo, website, blockchain explorer and client user interface (including desktop and smartphone).



“Until now, Lisk has been concentrating its resources on the development of the back end. We have released many optimization, stability and security updates to date marking the significant progress the platform is making. Now, our attention moves to making visible changes to our current ecosystem,” added Kordek.



The overarching aim of the collaboration, extending from March to August 2017, is to create a unified experience for Lisk users. Taikonauten will overhaul Lisk’s corporate design, developing a new logo and media kit. In addition, it will also design and develop a new website for Lisk. Finally, user interfaces for Lisk’s desktop, mobile clients and blockchain explorer will also be crafted and designed by the agency.



“Our vision, together with Lisk, is to increase the visibility of this important platform. We aim to keep user needs at the heart of our approach and to make Lisk even more accessible to regular Internet users,” said Maik Fahldieck, Founder and Managing Director of Taikonauten.