Parents vow to pull their kids out of school or move to another state to avoid draconian vaccination mandates

(NaturalNews) California Governor Jerry Brown has reportedly signed into law the contentious Senate Bill 277, which eliminates the freedom of California parents to opt their children out of vaccinations for personal reasons. All school-age children without an approved medical exemption will now be forced to get vaccinated in order to attend publicschool, a tyrannous mandate that has already driven many objecting parents to homeschool their children instead.The text of SB 277 explains that the bill, which was signed by Gov. Brown on June 30, will "eliminate the exemption from existing specified immunization requirements based upon personal beliefs," while at the same time allowing "exemption from future immunization requirements deemed appropriate by the State Department of Public Health for either medical reasons or personal beliefs."In other words, California parents will no longer be allowed to just fill out an affidavit for their children declaring a personal objection to vaccinations. They will instead have to go through DPH to obtainto opt out of vaccines, either for medical reasons or for personal reasons that the state deems worthy of an exemption.It's a declaration of war against medical freedom, a line in the sand that demarcates government tyranny in direct opposition to the will of the people. And the fallout is that many parents are now going off the radar in pursuit of an education for their children that isn't contingent upon first injecting them with neuro-damaging chemicals and genetically altered live viruses.According to reports, Gov. Brown was eager to sign SB 277 into law, delivering an official signing statement just one day after legislators brought the bill to his desk. It's a tune completely different from the one Gov. Brown was singing three years ago when he issued a signing statement in conjunction with Assembly Bill 2109 that seemingly supported both personal and religious vaccine exemptions.In his letter, Gov. Brown admitted that vaccines come with risks, but insisted all the while that they're necessary to benefit and protect the community. And with the stroke of a pen, he eliminated one of the only options that parents have to forego subjecting their children to forced medical treatments that could seriously injure or kill them.Prior to the bill's passage, a number of California parents vowed to pull their children out of school if it was enacted. Dr. Robert Sears, a pediatrician from Capistrano Beach, toldfollowing SB 277's signing into law by Gov. Brown that he expects a huge exodus from the conventional education system as parents opposed to vaccines seek greener pastures."[We] will see a big shift in children leaving schools for homeschooling ," stated Dr. Sears to the. "And families will group together in co-ops to educate their kids."As an added benefit, these same children will avoid being brainwashed in California public schools, which thereported back in 2013 rank the third-worst in the nation for both math and reading. Still, SB 277 represents nothing short of medical despotism, and its passage is likely to spur a whole new black market for forged and/or falsified vaccination records.Many Californians are also likely to flee the state entirely to places like Oregon, where public pressure blocked a similar bill, SB 442, from moving forward back in March."Parents don't like being told what to do, they don't like feeling like their rights are stripped away," stated Kimberly McCauley of the San Francisco Bay Area to KESQ.com. "People are going to start moving away. [Gov. Brown] just screwed California. Single-handedly screwed California."