Les Snead, doing his best to avoid the hype and hoopla:

@NFL_AM And that's Les Snead 60 yds downfield looking at Mike Evans while everyone else is up by Johnny Football. pic.twitter.com/arjRmj8Rzr — Tony Schreck (@shrek_13) March 28, 2014

Zac Stacy as bell cow running back?:

Fisher, on RB Zac Stacy's evolving role with Rams: "I think over time, he'll probably be that 70-percent of the carries guy." — Jim Thomas (@jthom1) March 26, 2014

Would it surprise anyone if the Rams selected Jadeveon Clowney with the #2 overall selection?:

Could Rams take DE Jadeveon Clowney at No. 2 overall? Fisher: "I've learned over the years that you never have enough pass rushers." — Jim Thomas (@jthom1) March 26, 2014

Looks like the Rams will be searching for a safety in the draft:

Houston Texans reached agreement on two-year deal with former Dolphins S Chris Clemons, per source. #Markman50 — Adam Schefter (@AdamSchefter) March 28, 2014

Does this signing affect the Rams' draft plans?:

Rams signed former Titans WR Kenny Britt to a one-year, $1.4M deal, including $550K, per source. Max value of deal is $2.9M. — Adam Schefter (@AdamSchefter) March 31, 2014

Rams' 1-year deal with former Titans WR Kenny Britt includes $550K guaranteed. — Adam Schefter (@AdamSchefter) March 31, 2014

Kenny Britt’s deal with the #Rams is worth $1.4M base, but incentives could take it to $2.9M, source says. — Ian Rapoport (@RapSheet) March 31, 2014

Les Snead talks with Alex Marvez regarding the progress of the Rams, Jeff Fisher, and the status of Jake Long and Sam Bradford:

Rams Pick Ideal Insurance Policy For Bradford: 101 ESPN

The Rams signed free agent QB Shaun Hill to a one-year contract last week. Hill represents a relatively inexpensive upgrade over Kellen Clemens. With Bradford, Hill, and Austin Davis now on the roster, will the Rams still be looking to draft a developmental prospect in May?

Rams' draft needs: Greg Robinson could bolster O-Line: NFL.com

Analyst Daniel Jeremiah assesses the Rams' needs heading into the 2014 NFL Draft, and the prospects who could fill those needs. Jeremiah suggests the Rams' primary needs are: offensive tackle, safety, cornerback, and wide receiver.

Secondary still a top priority for Rams: ESPN NFC West

The Rams have done little to upgrade their secondary this off season. They will undoubtedly be looking at this years draft to bolster the secondary:

"Armed with 12 picks in this year's draft, it's a safe bet the Rams will select at least one corner and one safety somewhere along the way. All that remains to be seen is whether those positions are enough of a priority for those picks to happen sooner than later."

Fisher sounds as if Rams will pass on Watkins: St. Louis Post-Dispatch

As expected, Jeff Fisher is giving very little away with respect to the direction the Rams will take in the draft. The Rams could go down many different paths on draft day, and likely have a surprise or two in store.

Rams agree to terms with WR Kenny Britt: St. Louis Post-Dispatch

Rams taking a chance on Kenny Britt: ESPN NFC West

Perhaps the Britt signing is best summed up by Nick Wagoner:

"Like the rest of the Rams' free-agent moves this offseason, adding Britt is a low-risk proposition. But it's also one that shouldn't come with the great expectations that Britt's career once carried."

Draft Prospects Highlight Reel: Cornerback - Darqueze Dennard - Michigan State

Rams Chat Rewind: ESPN NFC West

Nick Wagoner conducts his weekly question and answer period, covering a broad range of Rams-related topics.

2014 NFL Draft offensive line prospects: St. Louis Rams Official Website

Which offensive lineman will have the biggest impact as a rookie: Jake Matthews, Greg Robinson, or Taylor Lewan? Should the Rams invest a first round pick on one of the three?

NFL Draft Prospect Focus: National Football Post

Greg Gabriel reports on a pair of offensive line prospects that could be of interest to the Rams, in the later rounds of the draft: G Jon Halapio (Florida) and OT Seantrel Henderson (Miami).

Johnny Manziel's pro-day circus: NFL evaluators provide context: NFL.com

Albert Breer shares reactions from NFL evaluators, after Johnny Manziel's one-of-a-kind pro day last Thursday. Manziel could end up being an integral part of the draft-day puzzle for the Rams, who are ostensibly looking to trade down the #2 selection in the NFL draft.

Zac Stacy joined Kevin Wheeler to discuss the off season, especially the relief he felt when Rodger Saffold re-signed with the Rams:

Stat Facts Of The Week: Points Per Play Differential

Points Per Play Differential

Points Per Play Differential measures a team's effectiveness at putting up points - and preventing points from being put up against them - on a per play basis. Of the 13 teams that achieved 10 wins/made the playoffs in 2013, 11 of them ranked in the top dozen of this statistical measure. The Rams ranked 16th overall, with both the offence and defence contributing equally to the differential ranking. The Rams were one of only 16 teams to have a positive differential for the 2013 season.

Fisher: Nothing brewing on draft deal...yet: ESPN NFC West

Will the Rams trade down the #2 overall selection in this years draft? They have indicated many times their willingness to do so, although it's unlikely any deal will be included in advance of the draft.

"(We have) not really had any discussion with anybody, but that doesn’t mean to say we won’t." "But I think it’s highly unlikely that even if we did trade out that would we get the value that we did the first time around."

Way-Too-Early Grade For The St. Louis Rams' Off Season: Ramblin' Fan

Nathan Kearns grades all six of the Rams' free agency signings/re-signings since the beginning of the new league year on March 11. He gives the Rams a B+ grade overall. In addition to the key re-signing of Rodger Saffold, the Rams have added quality depth, while remaining fiscally responsible.

2014 NFL Draft: 5 Players Rams Should Target With The 13th Pick: Rant Sports NFL

WR's Marqise Lee and Mike Evans, S Ha'Sean Clinton-Dix, OT Taylor Lewan, and LB Anthony Barr are among the many possibilities that could exist for the Rams, with their second selection in the first round.

Which St. Louis Rams players need to step up in 2014?: Rant Sports NFL

Patrick Karraker suggests five younger players on the Rams who will be relied upon in the 2014 season: Brandon Washington, Benny Cunningham, T.J. McDonald, Trumaine Johnson, and Brian Quick. All could play critical roles for the Rams this coming season.

On This Day In Sports History

1992 - The NFL decides to stay with a 17 week schedule (16 games), instead of expanding to 18 games.

2014 NFL Draft Position Rankings: NFL.com

Mike Mayock updates his positional rankings for the 2014 NFL draft. The top 5 at each position have undergone some changes since his last update, the primary change being the elevation of Johnny Manziel to the top of his QB ranking.

2014 NFL Mock Draft: Walter Football

Charlie Campbell presents his updated 5 round mock draft. The Rams select LB Khalil Mack and OT Taylor Lewan in the first round, followed by S Jimmie Ward, QB A.J. McCarron, DT DaQuan Jones, and RB Kapri Bibbs.

Kenny Britt joins the Rams on one-year contract: Pro Football Talk

There's little not to like about the latest Rams free agent signing. A one-year "prove it" deal with only $550,000 in guaranteed money. A very low-risk, potentially high-reward signing. The only question that remains: does this signing mean the Rams will no longer consider selecting Sammy Watkins or Mike Evans in the draft?

Will the St. Louis Rams draft a top outside linebacker prospect?: Cover 32 Rams

I believe it's a long shot, but it's possible the Rams will select an OLB early in the draft. It's more likely the Rams will look for additional depth at the position in the later rounds.

Jeff Fisher knows there's no RG3 deal to be had this year: Pro Football Talk

Jeff Fisher certainly loves the depth of this draft:

"This draft is unique in that I think you’re going to get players in the middle part of the third round that potentially could start, and start very early for you," Fisher said. "It really depends on the positions, but there will be a lot of teams excited about who they have acquired in the first couple rounds because it’s such a deep draft."

St. Louis Rams Weekly Salary "Re-Cap"

The Rams currently have $9,589,358 in available salary cap space. This total includes all transactions up to - and including - the signing of QB Shaun Hill. It also includes the $3 million roster bonus offset the Rams will receive for Cortland Finnegan, who signed with the Miami Dolphins. It doesn't include the just-signed WR Kenny Britt. The Rams will have approximately $11 million in additional operating costs throughout the remainder of the year, which has a direct impact on available salary cap space.

A nostalgic look back at the Cleveland Rams versus the Chicago Bears, October 29, 1944:

Four safeties that will rock the league in 2014: Football Nation

Ha'Sean Clinton-Dix, Calvin Pryor, Ed Reynolds, and Deone Bucannon - my personal favourite - are all intriguing options for the Rams in the early rounds of the draft.

Jeff Fisher expecting big things from Tavon Austin: NFL.com

In his rookie season, Tavon Austin showed flashes of his brilliance on the field. Much more is expected of him in 2014, especially from coach Jeff Fisher:

"I think another year in the program, in the offence, OTAs, training camp, you'll see more production. I think we'll do a better job of using him now that we know what he's capable of doing."

5 Players the Rams must avoid in the 2014 NFL draft: Rant Sports NFL

A lot of time is spent studying prospects we would like to see join the Rams. Conversely, we rarely take in-depth looks at players we DON'T want on our team. Some names on the list may surprise you.

Rams Chat Highlights: Rams News Now

Highlights from Jeff Gordon's (St. Louis Post-Dispatch) weekly question and answer period.

Rams take a flyer on former Florida State star: St. Louis Post-Dispatch

Defensive back Greg Reid is another intriguing signing by the Rams this off season. A low-risk, potential high-reward player, who impressed the Rams at both Florida State's pro day and at a workout in St. Louis.

2014 NFL Draft position breakdown: Defensive line prospects limited: CBS Sports

Pat Kirwan takes an in-depth look at defensive line prospects in the 2014 NFL Draft. A very detailed explanation of the various positions across the line.

Rams must draft to fit coaching strengths: St. Louis Post-Dispatch

Bernie Miklasz examines the reasons why the Rams are unlikely to select a WR in the first round of the draft. I believe the signing of Kenny Britt might make it an even more remote possibility.

Timing isn't "right" for NFL return to LA: St. Louis Post-Dispatch

NFL commissioner Roger Goodell quieted notions of an NFL return to LA, during the owners meetings last week:

"We are going to do it right if we are going to do it. There are different proposals out there and different opportunities, but not one that we are focused on and can say that we have the right solution yet. We’re not there."

Blast From The Past: Canadian Classic Rock Tuesday: April Wine - Like A Lover, Like A Song

Please have a great Tuesday and a Ramtastic week!!