DTRAC is designed to relieve "SITTING PAIN". When we sit on a chair or couch, we naturally hunch and slouch. Your hips and back suffer. DTRAC helps relieve tension and stress on your back!

You will feel super relaxed in your low back and hips anytime anywhere. Portable so you can use it at your personal spaces or in Hotel room after long flights & long road trips.

No need for Fancy $100 Yoga Clothes. Put on PJ & any shirts. You are ready to rest your low back now. You can even play games on your smart phones on DTRAC because it uses your body weight to achieve "disc traction," "spinal decompression," and "lumbar support" effortlessly.

You'll need an HTML5 capable browser to see this content. Play Replay with sound Play with

sound 00:00 00:00

Spinal decompression is a type of traction therapy applied to the spine in an attempt to bring about several theoretical benefits including:

Create a negative intra-discal pressure to promote retraction or repositioning of the herniated or bulging disc material.

Create a lower pressure in the disc that will cause an influx of healing nutrients and other substances into the disc.1

SITTING is one of the biggest contributor for your Back Problems.

You do not need to ask your friends or husband/wife to massage your back anymore. Stop the awkward conversion. Just use DTRAC. By decompressing the spines, you can finally relax your spines & discs, and plus all the muscles around them.

JUST REST ON DTRAC.

DTRAC relieves the tensions in your low back so you can wake up refreshed every morning.

Before bed, to release stress.

Start your morning with DTRAC. Rest comfortably in effortless perfect posture in your low back. It will get yourself ready for work.

You may notice the differences immediately. In both x-ray and c-arm pictures, the increase in intervertebral disc spaces is about 2mm. DTRAC creates the negative pressure. Discs will be nourished with moisture and nutrients.

If you are sitting at your desk or driving more than 4 hours a day, your back needs DTRAC to reverse the damages on your discs.

With the daily use of DTRAC, most patients & users will see the differences in weeks.

Just pulling you up and down is not traction. Hanging upside down? Yes, it has a traction effect, but not every one can stay that way for a long time. Plus, ankles and hip joints open up more than low back pain. Therefore, chiropractors started to look for solutions. In 2012, on Journal of Manipulative and Physiological Therapeutics introduced a way of new traction. In short, it states that Disc Traction is most effective when achieved with the natural curvature of the low back (a.k.a. lumbar lordosis at 45 degrees). GUESS what that is? DTRAC!

Using your own body weight, DTRAC can achieve "spinal decompression" effortlessly. Therefore, safe and natural for the spines!

FIR is the newest addition to DTRAC. With the help of Zirconia, in the lap test, it was recorded to release 91.2% FIR.

I am Dr. Kang, D.C., a chiropractor, myself with 20+ clinical experiences. I graduated from Cleveland chiropractic college here in Los Angeles. These clinical years were very crucial for me as I can now distinguish what works and what does not. (Textbooks are not reliable once you are in the filed; they only become the references or decorations)

My wife had experienced a spinal disc problem during her pregnancy years and have suffered from a weak lower back ever since. I developed a DTRAC prototype for my wife at first. Under my careful supervision, she started to train with it for 5-10 minutes in the evenings. I was not to become fully aware of DTRAC's real power until 3 weeks later when she starts to notice no pain and no sciatica even long days of work on her feet. My wife also was suddenly struck by the realization that she had been on my feet all day long without even noticing the effort. Before DTRAC, she would only last a couple of 2 hours before having to sit down to rest my poorly, aching back! That was all the proof I needed to close my clinic and went ALL-IN with DTRAC. Now as the original developer of DTRAC, I stand by with the quality and effectiveness.

I finally teamed up with a GOOD team that I can elevate DTRAC to the next level. Without the burdens from the old team, I am very excited to explode its potential. I hope you can be a part of it! JOIN US!

Get Your Project Funded Today!

The Brand-New DTRAC team purchased all the patents, rights, moulds, manufacturing processes, etc. from the first DTRAC team and improved the product inside out. You can call it ALL NEW DTRAC. The only thing that we kept from the v1 is the concept & color. We are actually re-considering the color. If you have a great suggestion in color, please email us here: hello@DTRAC.ca

Different from the previous team, we have partnered with reputable manufacturer, packaging & fulfillment team ready before the launch.

Now all we need is your support to make it to reality once again. We hope you enjoy DTRAC v2 as much as we do.