PRODUCT DESCRIPTION

Squad up and breach in to explosive 5v5 PVP action. Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six® Siege features a huge roster of specialized operators, each with game-changing gadgets to help you lead your team to victory.

Master the art of destruction and gadgetry.

Face intense close-quarters combat, tactical team play, and explosive action in every moment.

Experience new strategies and tactics as Rainbow Six Siege evolves over time. Change the rules of Siege with every update that includes new operators, weapons, gadgets and maps.

Rainbow Six Siege is the acclaimed first-person shooter franchise developed by the renowned Ubisoft Montreal studio for the new generation of consoles and PC. Inspired by the reality of counter terrorist operatives across the world, Rainbow Six Siege invites players to master the art of destruction. Intense close quarters confrontations, high lethality, tactics, team play, and explosive action are at the center of the experience. The multiplayer gameplay of Rainbow Six Siege sets a new bar for intense firefights and expert strategy in the rich legacy of past Rainbow Six games.

KEY FEATURES

COUNTER TERRORIST UNITS

Counter terrorist operatives are trained to handle extreme situations, such as hostage rescue, with surgical precision. As “short range” specialists, their training is concentrated on indoor environments. Operating in tight formations, they are experts of close quarter combat, demolition, and coordinated assaults. Rainbow Six Siege will include operators coming from five of the most worldwide renowned CTU: the British SAS, the American SWAT, the French GIGN, the German GSG9 and the Russian SPETSNAZ.

THE SIEGE GAMEPLAY

For the first time in Rainbow Six, players will engage in sieges, a brand-new style of assault. Enemies now have the means to transform their environments into strongholds: they can trap, fortify, and create defensive systems to prevent breach by Rainbow teams.

To face this challenge, players have a level of freedom unrivaled by any previous Rainbow Six game. Combining tactical maps, observation drones, and a new rappel system, Rainbow teams have more options than ever before to plan, attack, and diffuse these situations.

PROCEDURAL DESTRUCTION

Destruction is at the heart of the siege gameplay. Players now have the unprecedented ability to destroy environments. Walls can be shattered, opening new lines of fire, and ceiling and floors can be breached, creating new access points. Everything in the environment reacts realistically, dynamically, and uniquely based on the size and caliber of bullets you are using or the amount of explosives you have set. In Rainbow Six Siege, destruction is meaningful and mastering it is often the key to victory.

©2019 Ubisoft Entertainment. All Rights Reserved. Tom Clancy's Rainbow Six Siege, Ubisoft and the Ubisoft logo are trademarks of Ubisoft Entertainment in the U.S. and/or other countries.