. many things can happen. Only YOU can control your reaction to it. Practice this good
is that kind of place. Like in DC. Ladybugs lurv it.
Taking orders for custom clips, pic sets and webcam shows!!!! ;)
Lol! I knew something was up!
that's great! I know u r.
oh I know... But I don't mean like that. She works at a television station here. She's adorable and it's a boy!
I don't think the Browns provided Colt McCoy enough talent around him to get a fair evaluation of his talent moving forward
Thanks. I am. So how you doin'?
Someone favorited my tweet from 62 days ago o_O
wow...is that who it was tho?
Glad to hear they enjoyed it. Thanks for bringing them in!
I haven't watched current season yet, but I loved season 1.
Looks like SLEEPLESS NIGHT, one of my favorite films from Fantastic Fest last year, is opening this upcoming weekend!
good cause they come in packs of 3 for $3 lol j/k
RT : Do you know of any great resources for adults with autism? I would like to add them to my next book. Thank You!
IM DONE WIT THA BULLSHIT ITS A INSIDE THING BUT I KNOW YALL FEEL ME.
I'm beginning to think coffee has achieved self-awareness and is trying to escape.
Happy birthday :]]
Ok God, I see you moving but ...
hahahah spell check
All New Year's parties officially over, given the latest S&P downgrades, Greek talks stalling & Mideast chaos bubbling - just for starters.
so far she has resubmitted her transcript to show increase in grades. how else can get off wait list at
- No Rental Car For Me !
I give up on this whole wedding thing...
Not only is this the first Bubba to get a Masters, he's the first that even picked a major.
sleep sleep and sleep that should do the trick
I need a trip to Cali and quick.... well when it warms up
I think you mean backcourt...and I wouldn't say "far better" however I'm a fan as well. And these were chosen before tourney
Who has no arms, no legs and hides under a pile of leaves? . . . Russell
“: Here we go watching a scary movie all by myself!! #foreveralone” #foreveralonebuddies ^_^
watching Bring it On ... x)
I'm just me. Or not me. We just don't know! LOL
looking forward to The Bachelor Pad. they r really pushing the Jake and Vienna conflict. it should be good!
#autismspeaks raise awareness for autism
Hot Interconnects Event Warms Up for Summer Symposium - HPCwire
Know how it takes time to build a reputation? Yeah, well, one use of the wrong finger can destroy it quickly. Just sayin’.
What a wonderful audience we had for tonight wouldn't you say ?
you are right! clearly i am a horrible daughter. May 12th is then.
If OSU beats Kentucky in the nat'l title game and Kansas makes the final 4, I'll win the pool.
Yeah, that's probably the best choice. I just want time to fast forward to 10:01am already
Give Thanks For Whaa Yuhh Are Now And Keep Fighting For What Yuhh Wanaa Be Tommrow
What a night at surrender... Make sure to come check us out tomorrow!! Only
That's good u doing better.
I wish I had your room -__-
Mornin' sat through presentation on interpretation of bog bodies by Eammon Kelly last night - I miss Ireland & civilization!
The Doors!
Happy 93rd birthday to wise Nelson Mandela. "Resentment is like drinking poison and expecting it to kill your enemy." - Nelson Mandela
I wna leave. I realized y I havent...
Some people will accept the Truth
Congrats to Lt. Col. Tammy Duckworth for #ywca2012 woman of distinction military/veterans affairs award.
I'm really jealous your in vegas.
heh! well I appreciate your thoughts! I feel like his arms need their own film.
My boyfriend broke up with me, my best friend stop talking to me, now all i can do is sit and cry my eyes out #ineedahug </3 :'(
At the airport Listenin 2 G.Q. "Disco Freaks (Rock-Nights)" & The Jacksons "Off the Wall (*Live)" #DancePartyinMyMind lol *Everything
that's what's up.
Trapped in my hotel in Maine. Going outside to check on if the world is a skating rink or a puddle. Hoping for puddle.
this message was not sent from me. It was sent from this twitter account: :t.co/ULK1mg3. some how they got into my account, and are
I wonder what kind of beer Philadelphia will be coming up with when the Devils put them out of their misery 2morrow...
Coffee party!
I hope the girls down the hall are at least hot, because judging by the daily smoke detector alarms, they're too stupid to cook.
I must have miss read lol
thank u xo
haha hay!!! where are you gonna end up going? and yes! well, mostlikely haha idk which day, and you?
Talk, love & respect God when you're in His presence AS WELL AS when you're not! It's the only way a relationship will grow deeper
BLING BLONG ALL DAY LONG KIDS! come get you some!
I wish Youtube's new Analytics was quicker with the stats feedback. #HatCat stats are stuck on 1/13 data, and I'm dying to track it further.
Thank you for the book!!
Jesus had some water and 6 large jars... Altered an entire wedding party & proved God's miraculous nature!
It's days like these that remind me why I love this city so much.
I guess the park didn't count as a try out?
Lord FatherSonSpirit God, I want you to have all of me always. Just have me as a tool in your hand or on your shelf.
Hello ! Hope you're having a great weekend! Thank you for the shout-out.
Notre Dame blue/gold game....
Tampa police arrest habitual burglar
The cp3 era was great. No losses and a whole lot of drama. Bring on Dwight
Stuidy break ... watching "Every Little Step" with Mike Tyson & Wayne Brady on FunnyorDie.com
as with u!
Are there movies other than the avengers?
Its sad when you see a friend who was you're best friend now be a total diffrent bitch then the bitch you loved...
So, now that I have said my piece on the horrible schedule of the LHSAA, I would like to say Good Luck to ALL teams participating! Great Job
Rock on ET!
I wanted to febreze homless people today but we didn't have any. Was gonna use axe, but "axing homeless people" doesn't sound very good.
Mark Amtower leading the fabulous conversation on improper payments at todays FedInsider forum!
People who are racists
thanks for the follow. you had me at dry-aged prime steaks.
Traffic in LA sucks ass today. Apparently if it's windy people can't drive.
Mom: Y U NO MAKE YO BED Me: Maybe cuz there is no point when im going to mess it up again later???
EXACTLY. and a spanish & ss test on the same day :/
They're here! is about to start.
The answer to injustice is not to silence the critic, but to end the injustice. - Paul Robeson
thanks for that link! I'll check it out.
I will definitely blog about it... after I finish a contract.
You generally feel unqualified delight, ?
u guys think some potatoe chips would cancel out my 40 minute run?
Can anyone tell me their favorite Ipad twitter ap? Ones I have seen dont have all the full functions.
Celebrating my grandma's 90th birthday today!
Haha, yep! Our whole office rocks the Air and we're in LOVE!!!
I was looking for your information to send to my manager but no longer see that tweet....
Oh I know.
My best ideas come to me on my long walks. Still trying to figure out a good way to record them so I don't forget them.
Congratulations to my son Teddy & his girl friend Sara on their graduation from South Dakota St today.Great speakers & party with flaun!!
You will have the pics! :)
A Minneapolis firefighter is in police custody after he was arrested on drug charges (methamphetamine). More info at 5AM on
boy meets world.
well they're all assholesssssss.
This English project... I don't even know where to start. I mean does Gulliver's Travels really need another chapter written for it?
460 tweets already ? Good job
love you too!
#FreshmanYearTaughtMe FLAWLESS JAY!
It's National Dance Day!
Sorry I get so many msgs plus I work a lot too, so its hard to keep up with them all!!
Holy shit. It's amazing how much better of a mood I am in just being on a college campus instead of at work.
#nowplaying the bled-silent treatment
I know. Seriously
You can get the knack very quickly! They have the same shortcuts as blogger I believe. Go for it! Looks great!
If marriage is your object, you'd better start loving your subject.
is bout to shock the world
I would totally watch a prime time TV series, "Duncahhan" starring Jack Hannahan & Shelley Duncan as Miami Vice-esque duo .
Sad irony is that broadcasters mentioned how lucky STL was avoiding rain/weather rest of country was getting.
don't remind me. Do we have a meeting?
you need to get better soon man, we need you on the field bro!
Mondays, Tuesdays, or Wednesdays *1st cut FREE - before 3pm. We'll do up to 2 free cuts per day. Call Raymond. expires 12/31/11.
At the mayoral candidate forum - New Shiloh
The day follows me is the day I learn how to do a backflip...
yes, apparently when men watch their calorie intake they still need a few calories for it not to count as a girlie diet drink
If you find it in your heart to care for somebody else, you will have succeeded. ~Maya Angelou
Interesting week. Looking for a new job.. Sigh
#teamallnighter is still up at 10:50 AM EST
got to give #BYU props, they capitalized on mistakes, and played stellar defense when it counted. #UHsb plays now at 3 pm HT today
Thursday spelled backwards always spells c-r-a-z-y.
Damn be having me pitching tents like I'm on a camping retreat #YouDaOne - XavierLT.com
& I smoke alotta weed to keep them niggas off my mind.
RT that when you find out ! And a vitamin for alertness. I want to quit coffee :/
#e2conf: "If you don't have an enterprise-wide collaboration system, how can your employees effectively use social media externally?"
Yes sir! Next time you're down you'll have to grab a plate! :)
to me, db is step in interpreting evidence, by cataloging, regularizing, relating it.
yes welcome back Zizzzzzzo
At Costco again ugghhh
slander is wrong
Thanks! I love your town. I spent a couple weeks there in '09 training for Ironman Canada. Beautiful!
hope u have fun at prom mines is in 2 weeks I can't wait :)
Thanks brot sometines we need to hear that
Your favorite *gadget* blog, I should say.
your birthday may be over, but ur still awesome to me...smiles
Faith came just in time.... this rain is in the way!
Chris Lynch, CEO of Vertica named as one of the most exciting mobile/data companies in Boston
Only if it's a team sport. Always have a spotter. RT : Drunk Walk Home should be an Olympic sport.
I think an adventure is our future! Just saying. lol!
the problems we faced in wisconsin are the same problems we face at the national level- fitzgerald
bitchy mood ? Yes.
Doing the manliest thing ever.. thinking about
Hey mikes a good guy! RT : Wow...thanks. RT : mike you have a perfect face for radio."
haha yeah I busted an ex on mine this morning, which is what sprung the thought.
sire hook cpope up with a performance slot for June 23 n if available no bs
i know a few meet me in the morn ill introduce you RT Research shows that 1 in every 200 people is a psychopath.
Free free free! Come to Ecoclean tomorrow and get your cutoff shorts you've been running around #sxsw in all week.
"Happiness doesn't depend on who you are or what you have; it depends solely upon what you think."
Working on the power point for Chapter tonight.
Toffee Caramel Ice Cream, Hershey Chocolate Syrup Popcorn and Old Vampire Movies. A definite Tuesday Night WIN
THE WORSE DAY EVER FML -_-
Silly politicians America's credit rating downgraded for 1st time ever even though you agreed to raise debt ceiling. Stupid in stupid out
make two dreams come true but following me nd 18
bummer. Good work, sir
But I dig.
Thx. The weekend is almost here!
I shall not die, but live, and declare the works of the Lord. The Lord has punished me sorely, but he did not hand me over to death
Nothing in life comes easy so stay strong, give them a taste of yourself, & show how hard you are.
great wine... thnx for sharing.
#PlanetGreen is showing "Wild Australia" and making me desperate to go there..
thanks man :) I knew we had something ;) haha
I'm just glad my depression has been very controlled lately
I can paint your portrait, work with you on price www.leocortesstudios.com and email
Ten minutes in and drops the v word.
We don't need to win 4 games. Just 1 game 4 times.
Needed a break from work, watched 10 minutes of "Maury". It's a feel good show. I Feel good I don't know anybody on that show!
Raw aesthetic gets a luxury relocation - The National
YUMMY WHOPPER!
you are now aware that when you swallow, you hear a weird noise..
no clue if I can my mom wont do anything about it.
you are the best! thx! Although now that we are friends...we've got a fridge to move, do you have a truck?
wow. never thought about the lesser of two evils in quite the same way...
#80Degree weather today,
Walked today! Looking forward to tequila lime chicken quesadillas for dinner. Yum! Thanks for the awesome chicaken, Tischlers!!
she can stay at my house.. I'll clean the dog cages just for her company. 😏
My kingdom for some rain! Southern NM continues to get it, but will the northern half have a chance? I'll let you know tonight on KOB 4!
What's the number for the fairy that stocks mothers' purses with gum and candy? I need to get on her route.
Everyone pussied out again today
no it's cute! lol just don't tell him because he might think you are (: haha
1 week until finals.. NO- more school ;)
I wish I had more energy on this gorgeous day! The only thing I want to do after work is pass out!!
Bummer - the Twins didn't do quite as good in your game as did in mine! 1 run in two games?! We still had fun though ;)
lol ....no worries everyone watches it...nothing is wrong w/ it! lmao I'm a big fan ; )
So, "glass break" alarm is going off and nobody's home. Where's Dog the Bounty Hunter when you need him?
Click on the doc title from your manage docs page to bring the details. You can add tags that are notes that only you can see.
Get exposure today for free post highlight tapes and photos we want to help college coaches find you
Aw Good Morning !
Loni, victim, also couldn't articulate abuses. She could only respond with yes or no to leading questions asked by prosecution.
#FF these awesome people! Once I win the lottery, they will be notified ASAP!
If you can't even name 3 songs off someone's mixtape, you are not eligible to tweet constantly about them. Stop.
O.... very nice Trek! Love white bikes! planning on any big rides this year? Tour de Cure, pelotonia, that kinda thing?
OH: when you are sleeping later, I am going to... interrupted by other person: Don't pee in my mouth! No, I was just going to cut your hair.
Casey Anthony not guilty on murder charges..
hello & Happy New Year!
glad drama is taking over batavia
#happybirthdaytravisclark You are so lucky!
Does anyone else feel extremely accomplished if you can pee and manage to only use one sheet of toilet paper?
That sounds cool! :)
i thought u were goin to bed and did u see my he on my mind post lol
Was in the same boat so I kicked it to overdrive this week. Most productive I've been all year and now I can enjoy my weekend!
Seattle's arterial streets are passable, so delivery trucks out to do their rounds, but the neighborhood streets are worse than ever.
earliest flight on the menu... hooded pullovers w/ the ill'nest geometry...
Wed Sept 15@ 3pm OPEN AUDITIONS for ALLEGRO DANCE CO at St Clairsville Ohio HIGH SCHOOL THEATER www.allegrodancecompany.net
thx for the heads up. ;)
no ones talk to me here
Tonight it's going down! Can't wait to test the new amps out
I haven't been to the Mall of America in quite a while myself. Used to go there all the time when I was a teenage
#earthquake I knew it! Woke me up too.
practice today :D
Other arts/culture orgs: Do you have any methods or insights to share on the side? Not scientific, but always helpful to hear.
I've been sitting here for like 3 hours trying to do this damn AP essay, and I've still got nothing. anoihsf(FF(R#BNF(*D#BRUNRFC(*#!!!!!!!!!
My mom told me that she doesn't like my short hair -_- then why you didn't say anything before ?
You don't know what it means to win.
Don't try to catch a snowflake with your tongue unless you're positive that it's snow.
right! They're too cute <3
yeah ave, i care!
Ok so go to youtube, type in watch her videos, click subscribe and Bob's your uncle! :')
S/O from the CEO's of Ganksta Enterprize!!! Thanks for the luv
Working at the zoo on a rainy dreary day. So far, no one is interested in coming, but I can't blame them, I don't want to be here either.
Driving on 405 freeway in So Cal today and on a huge billboard #espn is advertising the LSU/BAMA game Jan 9th
hehe thank you as well
what's hat size he won't answer me
well you could have talked to my bestest frann on twitter..and we have talked before..
RT : ": Christan, do you see yourself as the loving slave of a loving Master?"
Fucking glitter... you can only blame it on your wife so many times before she stops waring it.
Too bad Angelina Jolie couldn't attend the Oscars. But it's nice that her skeleton was able to make it in her place.
I cant get your smile outta my mind... :)
There was a prom in the museum visitor's center tonight. Would that seem cool to you in high school? My nerdy self would have loved it.
RT : Didn't know this was possible. RT LeBron and D-Wade flat out dominated the 4th.
sorry wasn't near phone. Glad getting him checked out. So hard to know what caused spasms
That's right! Awesome deal...thanks, ! RT : UT Alumni can get 30% off tickets to the Biltmore! YES!
RT : Sometimes the Past comes back arnd 2 teach us a lesson we missed the 1st time. Learn from it then let it go.
look at the photo I just posted man. Nothing wrong with the act of course, but for a front page cover... Idk
standup tonight at
shout-out to Kentucky #USGenWeb from Tim Pinnick /via
it's never too early. I have *secrets*. When we do the tea-bag drop I'll share.
My dad was washing his car & his soap bucket got stolen dear god
Funkotron is next!!!
lol no :o ik u go to south rite?
Melancholy men [possess]... a divine ravishment, which stirreth them vp to be excellent Philosophers, Poets, Prophets." - R. Burton, 1621
going for a run and then beginning training for my backup career as a professional sc2 player. Ben.Prime.WE
its all good lol
Hangin' in there! How are you? :)
: RT : Rivera said he decided in his hotel room last night that this isn't the end. "Miracles happen," he said
For that negative comment I sneezed so hard I felt like I broke my jaw and rib -__-
Finally done studying! Listening to some Justin Bieber before going to bed.
Nathan Sykes from The Wanted looks just like Christian Beadles just an older version (: MEGUSTA
Sleeping♥ & yourself? :)
i cant wait until it comes out
Wow! Some great company you have there!!
Impressed by at the #gk12 annual meeting
I smell spring.
School , & cheer tomorrow (:
Hm...Alex Smith wants a new agent, and Niners sign Manningham. Maybe Manning next?
I wear glasses, too, and 3D movies give me headaches. Hopefully, you'll fare better than me.
we rep Ohio EVERYDAY! #DeezyNation is back!
Thanksgiving is coming up next week! We want to know: what are you thankful for this year?
#np the replacements - i will dare
If you're in Alabama check us out
Hunan's sesame beef!
Austin bound!
Ok. I will get on it. Thanks.
Cool fact. RT : 2,000 electric vehicles to hit #SanDiego streets this year alone; 10% of the 20,000 Nissan Leafs ordered by San Diegans
How do vampire football players get the mud off? They all get in the bat-tub.
safe travels luv. See you soon.
i've been in my bed since 1pm i havent gotten up literally at all except for food is this what it feels like to be obese?
haha  he loves us!!! But mostly me  lol jkjk
Fuck talkin bout it,just do it....
We have followers from all the way around the world! A big shout out to our international friends!
When I listen to #NeverSayNever and then #Boyfriend it really shows how much you've grown up! :D
Hope you aren't hurting too bad & have a speedy recovery!
Good morning, Austin! Let us know if you need help with your relocation needs.
Come on Rubens!
on the bus lo im bored and i have a full batterie on my phone for one lol
bye issac do u follow
discussing the structure of a #git repository - commits, branches, versions
Brently forgetting diesel for the compressor.
Homework <tv.
Awesome - thank you!
undercover writing. Lol :) sneak a verse in!! Always good to have quality time though.
Thanks for the info!
I'd like the record to show I've been a fan, since before it was cool... #HockeyHipster :)
Need some excitemnet!!! Have been a bit board lately.
good morning people..
I am currently taking donations for a pair of Jeffrey Campbell shoes, help a girl out!
Is it raining? (sarcasm)
Thanks for being Dianely's fans!
Thanks Guy - Appreciate the kind words
haha i call everyone tht. and same here lol. my mom is big on bollywood!
oh, aqualung
I think so - Sunday night and Monday probably...may need to be a +1 :)
So awesome... thought I was was the only one who got those calls!
there's no excuse for bad oral hygene.
I know your somewhere out there...somewhere far away. #teamjammer is here to stay. We ain't going away!
Well your words before were prophetic ... now they are down by 3.
Something provoked the whole globe to lower expectations, damn what's wrong with my generation?
CES unveiled was a blast! Lifestyle Connect is now official...
Complete Locksmith lock and key Service inIndianapolis - Residential, Commercial and Automobile
& Wsj biz ed Tom Enwright“: Besides Rob, most famous Wisconsin Rapids resident = Dick Trickle.”
OMG plzz follow me or tweet I love your crew soo much I be giivng you love from Canada
That moment u trip in ur heels during lunch rush hour...
Mvt. 1 of an Organ Suite commissioned for our church's new pipe organ is shaping up nicely.
it would have to be after Wednesday. But yes:)
is packing up a Virginia state stone order for Occoneechee State Park gift shop.
happy mama means happy baby. Missing you!
really? I didn't know that.
Was it Leslie Nielsen?
he is fuck crazy :)
My bad I missed your texts what's good
That's your story and I'm sticking with it, too! :-)
Something going on pretty much every weekend until August. Let the summer madness begin!
RT IF YOU LOVE "MY CHEMICAL ROMANCE"...
you were at work
let me know how it is...
In the past we've gone to the Claddagh downtown on wednesdays at 8, but we've been talking about finding a new bar
+1000 I think the offices should have bunk desks. We'd have so much more room for activities!
Not kidding, I voted for Geno 40 times yesterday. My finger still hurts from all the clicking!
stop that!
SHE STARTED iT!...
I love you Madisonn<3 hope you had a good day(:
I'm shocked at how great all the guys are on idol. What a pleasant surprise.
I got the perfect prank to pull today
but paris hilton is going to be at the kaskade show. the kaskade show that I'M GOING TO.
Bo, all good. Just killing time.
Anyone going to warped tour this year? Who are you excited to see?
in general? Or for being cowboys and hippies? Or for tweeting? Wither the mockery?
welcome to MKE!
woot! you go girl! (you may or may not need some coffee)
sick at my stomach looking at this news coverage... please pray for all those effected by today's weather and the rescue teams.
don't make roofus do all the work now..come on get out there!
Google guy mysteriously suggests that I double down on Google+ starting right now. "but I can't say why. Just trust me."
The whole world is at #zonamaco12, students, entire families
we will habe fun
ANSWER YOU ARE AMAZING!!!!!!!!!1111
If it's up to the same standards as the root beer is, then I'm sure it's amazing. Beer and root beer are two of my vices. :-)
Oh I hope that I win!!!
for my new followers: please don't forget to follow for #hr and #hiring information and job opportunities!!! =)
. says customers generate 20% of content on Dell's web pages. He predicts it will quickly grow to 60% #scs11 WOW.
Producing an instrumental atmosphere to extend the end of one of Jeremy's songs on "From The Dust To The Stars" today, then mastering.
Tonight, Chef Drew Dzejak of prepares Seared Diver Scallop Salad & Poached Citrus Shrimp. 7 p.m., Channel 14 / 32.
Tamara at A: there is a limit, the more you segment an audience, the larger room for error there is."
I wanna go to the one @ south padre...is it scary :S
Make a difference today in someone's life!
Writers: get published at ezinearticles.com ...
My life is one big embarrassing moment
Ralph, thank you for stopping by and Happy Easter everybody.
valiant effort there, bud. I'm pretty sure the Torts interview one has a pretty short shelf life, anyway. Fun novelty, though.
Goodnight, fools.
Thank you!
G'morning! Good to be here@ #SMBLA!
i feel distant and have a headache from jealous people.. i need new friends!
exactly! I don't share with people who don't share with me.
ohh i will!
RT : Korver was wide open and you KNEW he was going to hit that. #CHIvsDET----->EXACTLY!
More tremendous officiating in this year's playoffs. Kovy has a right to be incensed.
I don't even how i feel...
It is all how you think about it...and it is all up to you
thanks. updated it overnight - not paying attention obviously
I just declared next Sunday "Take a Jew To Church Day" to help them become completed Christians! Love you Ann and Jesus!!!
Slice of the week North Ave: BOLOGNESE!!!
Shavuoth is next week. If you haven't submitted your 2012 March of the Living application you're late. www.caje-miami.org/mol
In my wicked bizarre head, fellow Austinite is my best friend and we drink martinis all day & shame everyone that walks by.
And congrats back, We're crossing out fingers for 6!
Welcome David! Thanks for your support! :)
hi Sharon, sent you a reply to your tweet re: #autism via e-mail. Thank you!
Shindig will be going down for a bit while we unwrap some new toys. See you soon!
"Wives may be merry, and yet honest too." -One of my favorite lines. From Shakespeare's Merry Wives of Windsor.
What would happen if dimensions crossed barriers? Metal lighted birds appeared to Lewis and Clark? Paved roads appear to sacajawea?
I'm doing good. Busy with life guard training, about to start summer classes, just being busy. How are you, bebe?
Feel free to tweet me as much as you want now, I'm not gonna reply because this argument was dead hours ago. Bye now.
« « #EverydayIThinkAbout how good God has been to me»»
do u wanna follow me?:)
My friend is such a great guy but the kind of men he is attracted to... I better write about this.
This Nigga Tony Parker Be Ballin.
Yes, I still make wishes by blowing on dandelions... So what?
“: I hate when people are unprepared to win! Biggest night in Hollywood-if you're nominated, write an acceptance speech!”
Uprooting rid of all the spam bot followers by unfollowing everyone. Don't unfollow me if you are human, promise to follow you back;-)
thank you all for the MT's during the #jazzday concert last night, we appreciate you!
FREE FREE FREE WEBSITES LET US HELP YOU GROW YOUR BUSINESS LET US HELP YOU GET MORE CUSTOMERS DON'T WORK HARDER WORK SMARTER studio5one2
we'll see what kind of beat down delivers tomorrow. My other trainer has a softer side for rest days
Ah, Super Bowl Wkend. Hope the game is good, halftime show is engaging, the ads outrageous and Glee is over the top
When you sleep till almost 4, and you can't sleep that might <<
sorry, we didn't. Got some Yards IPA.
“: That's what we want! ” How long are u on tonight?
Ate one hot dog and two hamburgers
New Life Class watching Courageous at 5:00 pm today! #pizza time
chillin' w/ da bestie and we #summertimefine!!! let summer keep on rolling!!!!
Now you're just somebody that I used to know.
As always, thanks for the RTs! :)
Special Day @ Nelson house. 1st day the whole family works from home. Cool to think Asher wont remember mom or dad having 'go 2 the office'
I have a 3 for the price of 2 coupon. ;^)
I thought you were wearing a headdress the whole time.
- I LOVE Princeton too. Just everything about him makes me smile.!!!!!!
RT : was the 1st person in line for the iPhone4S in Las Gatos' Apple Store this am. Nice tribute 2 your friend Jobs! URock!
Ur slogan's so #winning haha
MERRY CHRISTMAS EVERYBODY! =D
no prob & big shout outs to Rocco & his beautiful wife who made out night extra unforgettable!
Aye Aye Aye Aye !! Leave Me T'f Alone Chick !!! Damn !
We do it Straight like daaaaaat, get money straight like daaaaaat.. who want it straight like daaaaaat..2 CHAAAAAINZ!!
RT : Perk up at the World's Largest Coffee Break today at 9:30am at Catalano Square (Menomonee & Broadway). Free coffee and treats!
How fun! What was the piece and instrumentation?
RT : Should hve took my ass to ritz tonight :(
Filed report with for my #stolen mountain bike. Gary Fisher, orange/black. Buggers left me my bolt cut lock. So nice
after your concert in NYC you should have a concert in tampa :)
Monarch butterfly just flew into the cafe, buzzed each person's head, one by one, and flew back out.
what's up? Did your folks beam you to outer space?
spotify should be set now
searching for a DIRECTOR of QUALITY with #DAIRY experience @ $120k
Hola and buenos dias to you. Best wishes to you for a great week. Take care and stay beautiful.
Standing desk. Pro vs Con. Go.
peace! If you don't like it, don't buy it. using a tool a carpenter uses doesn't make u a carpenter
Guys wanted to offer me less that my chip Icm to give equity to CL I declined after consulting with Deeb. Got 3rd anyways for 115k. GG gn
Rethinking that noisy neighbor thing...
There is a naughty boy in lots of men (like Greg and me) that needs his pants taken down by a no-nonsense lady (like you).
Oh, fantastic! has drastically changed the way I approach...well, everything. You'll love her!
#cwebodymedia What does tour Tebet market segmentation look like? Which of those customers is your target customer?
All I know is that it is so hott!!! Anyone agree?
good signing.
no way!!! Are you for real?! :) we like him
Yankees activate Eric Chavez; send Eduardo Nunez to Triple-A. (Carig)
I wish would make me something to eat -.-
so they not jumpin me ? Well he must be an octopus then cause I saw a lot of shit up in my face
do count as breaking out? They've been around for awhile.
Ivy Champ Men&#39;s Swim/Dive Team Names Award Winners, 2012-13 Captains
It's a taping week. Crazy
#10ThingsIHate: mean people, chocolate, female condoms, church, squash, idiots, brainfreeze, queefs, celibacy and birds.
Starving. But all I can eat is disgusting oat meal and ice cream.
This is true. Also, Nathan is being facetious in saying my doppelgänger is out for blood.
RT : ADMIRALS WIN!!! 5-3 win over Houston give the Ads a 2-1 series lead. This is one of the stranger games we have seen...
I clicked on it and is says wiki not found : (
I'm hoping there is a little burka on burka action
your right.
=QUESTION= What types of deals, contests, prizes, etc. would you like to see from us now and in coming semesters? Comment and let us know!
Teacher sees phone "give it!" girl "no!" teacher "give it!!" girl shoves it down her bra "want it now?!?!?!?"
You don't seem to be very active on da twitterer lately.... #whaddupwitdat?
Mischlers Florist for the perennial sale. And we'll go to lunch. Flower shopping in cold rain is a bummer! Did that last year!
we're already following each other
I'm starved !!!
good grief
R.I.P. Joe Morello
Those that want respect, give respect.
is it really that much better tho.
you guys kick some serious ass, just FYI
Too much shit to do today, but gotta get shit straight with
RT : There are a lot of ppl on laptops in here. Do you ever get tempted to stand up and yell #NANOWRIMO in a crowded coffee shop?
hey Toledo your tweet to your daughter inspired me to send the same to mine. I thought you should know that
“: What did y'all think of Steven Tyler? Thought it was pretty cool.” it was terrible! Were we listening to the same thing?
uh huh
Know your place
Develop the winning edge; small differences in your performance can lead to large differences in your results. -Brian Tracy
Thanks for the RT.
Starting LOST.
we are til 8 if you stop by i'll give you one..#kop now owes me :)
no more rules...let the music set you free!!!
lol already did
Thanks for the follow! We look forward to reading your tweets
okay awesome! Haha I didn't either!
dated no way? Certain subjects each sex excels. Prefer single sex education any day!
marlon perkins' wild kingdom sponsor
#Reds take the series from the cubs!
♫ I discovered Kasabian when I was using on my iPhone
Is one more important when meaningless without the other? :) RT : "Imagination is more important than knowledge..." Einstein
Trust me, he will.
with my favorite colombian girl !
I would really like to see Dane Cook in a pair of Chuck Norris Action Jeans.
#BadCauldronSongIdeas Barracuda by Heart? That'd be a helluva stretch.
Watching horror movie called "Ju-On"
:: Kopp's has a weather-appropriate custard flavor today, according to CHOCOLATE THUNDER
#boxing was glamorous& romantic. You listened to fights on the radio, A good announcer made it a contest between gladiators. Joseph Barbera
psst, I'm calling all music enthusiasts to be a part of the next phase of this digital magazine. all writers/photogs/artists are welcome :)
ePatient is also an activist for the doctors. You need to find ways to educate a doc. Don't just leave when the going gets tough
I'm reading tweets and some Arianators are really rude and being mean to people....
Mr. Baughman gives us essays at the worst times...
A couple session and a baby session in the works for this weekend. Can't wait to add the photos to my portfolio, and to try some new things!
that is terrible, thanks for sharing the article
Why do boys think its okay to just message you on fb even though you've never talked to them in your life? No that's creepy.
Congratulations.. It's never too late!
we have YOU to thank for this! You've been our #1 supporter from day one, and we REALLY appreciate it. :)
i can be your hero
Imagine if there were such things as candy land I swear huge gummy bears chocolate licorice omg anything I wuld be going there 2 a week lol
I guess it should be "Illegal Immigrant Says Que?".
Thanks for following!
they have shane and I.. thats all they need
Switching between the Lakers game and Scared Straight
I get so upset and emotional when I see these chicks on Basketball Wives always pickin on the pretiest and tiniest girl who cannot fight.
yeah hoe!!!...in my TRHEE6MAFIA voice!!
I gave you my twitter at the radio staion and you still haven't followed me!.
Goin' out with muh gangstas...and by gangstas I mean one gangsta...and by gangsta I mean my sister. :op
Spend more time mining your database, the backend, instead of adding features to the front end UI
Charlotte loves Austin too!
Dear Ex, Just because I'm nice to you, doesn't mean I want you back. We broke up for a reason.
thank you and for all you do to help people...don't be discouraged by the idiots of the world. You are appreciated!
if it was a good deal you should do it
Opening date is now week of 12/12 (lucky number we're thinking!)
Wtf, you have to pay to watch 500 days of summer?! #waytoruinmynight ! :(
Things I needed to buy today: groceries, shoes for work. Things I actually bought today: wine, tank tops. Close enough!
Why is everyone talking about a Pencil sharpener.?
<.< Just get outta here already.. *dies*
Yes, you are right. I can't expect them to get all info in lobby.
My kitchen window faces the street. I open my fridge & drink milk from the carton knowing I may be seen. I like to live life on the edge.
#IfYouDontBecomeAFan Done and done!!
Checking on Pinterest for my upcoming class and my page is filled with pictures of food. What the hell is wrong with you people?
Never buy used lol want new...to much more can go wrong
this is calling our names RT : We have the and heat lamps outside! What more do you want?!
i smile... because i have no idea whats going on.
Physically exhausted from this trip! It was a true test of metal endurance to make it fun none-the-less!
Wish I was on Foxwoods still & not home
Great site!!
YES -.- My phone is so tiny and so are the letters. Then, autocorrect makes me look like a perve ,and FML </3
PCB bound next week!
Follow VotingContest to learn about upcoming Elettro Interactive Contests & Sweepstakes. Follow contest announcements.
Ate fish on the bone at las brasas on four mile run. South arlington, yo.
absolutely. I will discuss the fed as much as possible on this page as well as something I am getting involved with.
those are some good ones. Um… I would have to saw either project man dime or when nitro circus came to the factory.
Sigh - on the personal side, gotta run and get to my SPHR Strategic credit training.
of course... My son went through a pigeon phase RT Of all the animals my child could possibly want to see, he keeps saying 'boar'
Arizona Hot Air Balloons wanna say, Happy new years. May your homes be filled with joy and love. Gentle Breezes
First you take a drink, then the drink takes a drink, then the drink takes you. - F. Scott Fitzgerald
Ditto... RT Dear zara: this would be a lot more efficient if u just took money directly from my paycheck. Best, Lara.
#partners There seems to be some confusion. Do our Flavorlock bags protect the beans from the harsh cold?
did you get asked like that..?
PRESS DIGEST-Sunday British business - April 29
NOAH YOU RULE. MERRY CHRISTMAS!
still in spain big themepark tomorrow , wont be back on here till monday album on my phone for the travel back with tashaa!
Good thing my phones charged
My Mom leaked my new record in Columbus to a few DJs but its startin to pick up so im not mad at all
Chad Billingsley incredibly inconsistent and unreliable against an awful team...I would have never guessed
I will attend the Mobile Track at Computers in Libraries #CIL11 3/23/11 to learn about big trends in mobile tech
Why do you care if I fucking dye my hair? Just shut the fuck up. -_-
nice seeing you last night and as you saw I had to get the hell away too.
The stuff of nightmares!
you'll never see this, i'm such a HUGE fan/DIRECTIONER and i love for being such inspirations ALOHA :)
We'll need ongoing folks, so check back with us? :-)
"Do not allow people to dim your shine because they are blinded. Tell them to put on some sunglasses, cuz we were born this way bitch!" :)
The fuck you doing? Blowing Swishers
Hi Krizley, avail in stores spring 2012 however I'm sending a few promotional samples out to a few people.
.-.+|- G1 CERTIFIED WET TSHIRT CONTEST --- FRIDAY CLUB DRAMA --WANT TO GET IN FOR FREE?? TXT ME I WILL TELL YOU HOW---214 609 3316 --
good morning :)
he's a wanna be actor
That's wsup had too I need them Japanese Nike running shoes 😂😂😂😂😂 RT : u killed that one lol nicee
Tonight at 10pm we are playing at Jazz Dock with my father Karel Sr. on piano, bassist extraordinaire Josef Feco and great drummer...
Happy bday !<3 You're my role model and i've been a fan since day 1! , and
Unimpressed by Nicki Minaj's performance, stupid!
#RITHockey fans: is actually known much more for white hots than sausages. Just sayin'.
#trend: increase in people searching twitter to find information they're looking for, example support due to recent diagnosis
You are very welcome. Tweeting is so much fun isn't it? You meet some really great people too.
#Kobe with 24, isn't Coach Brown the same guy that lead the #Cavs & LBJ 2 the best record 2wice w/LBJ win'n 2MVP's?
#FF My top followers this week:
you better call me when you get here!!
Cinco de mayo at the zoo
Latest version of 4Square for IPhone is a disaster. Can't do much of anything. All attempts to check-in - FAIL!
This is ridiculous!! Colton Dixon should not have been eliminated! Hollie you should have left!!! </3 </3
We play at 5 at Valhalla. Bird dog promo party. Come on out.
It's not called addicted it's called in love...
Mad he didn't come but I am still a faithful fan nd loves
These Bulls better win this game!
Got a prezzie from can't wait to go home and open it
the link will be up too no worries
Inspiration is key to creativity
Can't sleep -_-
#Lakers playing hard. Especially #SteveBlake and Still too close for comfort.Should be up 15 Denver don't look good though.
How long is Ironman? I feel like I've been watching this movie all day.
awe thank you!!!! youre the best! :))
CC Tenants: Concierge is giving away Admirals tix for Sun 2/26 3pm game (courtesy of the Private Bank) While supplies last! Limit 2/person.
I'll be on MFC too but I don't think your talking about My Friends Couch RT I'll be live on Mfc tonight! I miss u guys!!!
#ILostRespectForYouWhen you asked for a take two
had a great zumba class tonight.....
14-0 Wisconsin, late first half
thanks ; shall we hope for your attendance/blessing?
I hate programming a microprocessor. It's so hard, I understand the basics of electronics but this is too far in
Shout out to my new followers! Thanks for the follow!
um who did you have drinks with today and why wasn't I invited??
Taking healthy dose of coffee and agent-based modeling this morning, w/ sides of fried eggs and sorting + peer effects
As Americans, we rejoice in the recovery of Gabrielle Giffords. Is there anyone who does not swallow hard when seeing video of her speaking?
Is there no austream today? :(
get off Lebron dick so early in the morning bruh
Let's just say that the Ewoks' Yub Yub song holds a special place for us, and leave it at that...
if u can make Baltimore on ur way I can make u a killer bowl of crab soup! Definitely no "junk food"
Haha. Well, you can't legislate against stupidity. Mostly because it would not be in the best interest of the legislators.
payday is in approximately an hour #icansmellit :)
to see Monty Alexander with Sly and Robbie. Three legends who have played w the legends. Special guests expected. Still seats!
UCSD's Geisel Library (which looks like it's from SF) is important in Vinge's *Rainbows End.*
is releasing our new single "Armagetiton" tonight! Make sure to stay up and check it out! ;]
Once you learn on how to close your mouth, work on those legs...
People rarely succeed unless they have fun in what they are doing - Dale Carnegie
Baby over here smashin' and he full!
Yes, yes they are very good. I'll tweet when I review them so you can see. And, I know it is so hard to write with kids.
: Singing tonight with retweet for tickets !
Half way exiled, my life has been a melancholic slow (sometimes fast) silent movie.
Have an extra ISTE reservation if anyone needs one- canceling tomorrow-
and will then fit a replacement lock for you or make key or re-key your lock so the old key will not work.
lol thanks for your support!
Thank you
Some weaves are pretty..
I think you forgot the YEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEEAAAAAH!
boi get out of here wit dat..dis is nt turtle time..oh i guess dats y u movin slow
RT : I think I'm one of a small group of people that has never seen Modern Family...ah! Such a good show!
RT : Ladies:: Be selective..Finding Mr right is like finding good shoes..The 2 gotta match &amp; they MUST FIT!
Then as the question!!?!?!?! Duh
"Beautifully observed and rendered in a thoughtful, measured prose" our Allen B. Boyer's GUMSHOE GRANNY INVESTIGATES only $2.99 on
how are u today
what mood is that
Agreed. Houston is awful!
Naw, not at UC Homecoming, but the East Price Hill Jazz Fest on Saturday at 3 PM!
In 'our lives matter' Anna Crago does an excellent job detailing eight groups from different nations, what they face, and how they responded
So, apparently Jason Bartlett is on the verge of release in SD. The #brewers absolutely need to make sure he ends up in MKE.
I need a massage
Thank you for the follow! Sounds like a GREAT service! Hook 'em!
I don't think a Venti is going to be big enough today! - how about a bucket???
booking my rental car for derby , rentacarnow.com baby
Handle your business without people knowing your business.
Breakfast for lunch is always a good idea. Not a good idea: not eating breakfast UNTIL lunch.
i waant to be forgotten and i don't want to be reminded" de the strokes de la cancion what ever happen
Waiting to file the marriage license!
thats no bueno lol but i hope your day goes better tomorrow
ah midterms!
because it conceives of power as distributed across different groups in society, shifting over time and issues.".
Followers, are you major vloggers? Share your experience if you'd like. I Have a Youtube account and may consider it next year.
I gotta say... This year ive met some amazing people. #IThankGod for putting them in my life (:
what channel does that come on
When your dog hears noises that frighten her, it�s advisable not to nurture her anxieties by comforting her
its embarrassing lol
Today's Sandwich: Mini grilled Reuben served with a cup of soup......$6.95
I don't believe that in December 2012 is the end of the world, I think that will happen big important changes in our world. IS
try and get everyone to follow me and please try and get austin mahone to follow me
hahah I just love this entire movie! I have it on VHS & used to watch it every wknd at my dads lol
just to clarify: being british was the insult, not be ethnically sandwich fucked.
“If you don't read the newspaper, you're uninformed. If you read the newspaper, you're mis-informed.” ― Mark Twain
wahhh we miss you too <3 let's hang out soon I promise I won't try to kill you
State Committee for Family, Women & Children considers adoption procedure in ... - Azerbaijan Business Center
I hate it when people drop plans for a stupid reason.
I love it that #Castle screams like a little girl.
Novak discount double check
It's been a damn good day!
You have made me happy. Was gonna give up on twitter but I will stick around for better tomorrows and ppl I may relate to. Thx.
when will you come back to Philippines??????!!!!
strictly for live men not fresh men
Just saw a Vending Machine with Yes I Accept Credit Cards And Debit.... Wth...
Trying not to crack up on the platform. :)
LMAO! Best way to start the Spurs game...watching the Mavericks get swept! Hahaha! Goodbye losers!!
out with the old and in with the new
Can't play tomorrow but gon be there anyway
Follow back?:)
Starting the Special K diet on Wednesday! Trying to go from 123 to 115! I love food too much so I'll need y'all to wish me luck!
wow, time flies! Any plans to celebrate your last day?
I've reached the point where drinking bad wine/coffee/beer just isn't worth it.
Another shareholder asks JPM to divest from companies doing biz in Sudan & thereby supporting genocide... So far JPM opposes all resolutions
I'll say it again... Young men need Good Fathers.
“Tea...is a religion of the art of life.” - Okakura
by the time the iphone 7 is released I predict that Siri will belch and fart and become that annoying roommate that you can't kick out.
Birthday s/o to because i love her :)))
I am the of
The Beach With My Sisters Was FUN !
Well you are welcome anytime :D
. 21 days till boyfriend . Can't wait
just got a job at a nursery in reigate :) how are you all? I bet Jayden has got massive!! X
please dont be freaked out by seattle right now :/
Omg I love that song! Tell him I gave him a virtual high five xD
"not surprised by success rate of incubator companies, NYC is intellectual capital leader"
Ik I Cant Help It Lol
you should follow our Des Moines friends | : 5 follows away from 200 - we're almost there!
u on yo a game today with the tweets!
right doe.
Looking forward to a great week! Thanks for mentions:
When you're so tired you could sleep on the copy machine
Lind: tea, coffee, tobacco, sugar, spices were the 18th and 19th century drug trade.
I'm not gonna lie. That pic of Daniel Day Lewis as Lincoln really turns me on.
Tune Into Hot 107.9 #OBSESSIONS TUESDAY GOT A LIL BIGGA S/o To #Campaign & #MYKKOMONTANA LIVE! #241DJz Host x #YunggDayDay241 ....
Oh Menagerie how I`ve missed you. Thanks Ricky for such a fun night full of shopping, drinks, & good convo. Te amo.
I want you to want me...
"If we see what God sees, then maybe just maybe we will act like God acts!" —Delano Johnson (T&BNOV26)
Good Question: What Are The Numbers In The ZIP Code? - CBS Local
I love you too :)
When pandora knows exactly what to play >>>>>
RT : Its hard to be 100% better than your competition, but you can be 1% better in 100 ways Rich Melman
Apparently you have to stir stir-fry. I'm new at this get off me.
& he told me that Tim was flirtin with some bitch in their 6th bell
But half DP and half root beer is so good!
If this info is true I'm going on a rant give me min
What I do tho?
Please don't be in love with someone else. </3
Seems like everyone is going to 's concert but me....
like does she not know how she's making her self look?
Find your favorite motivational quote and share it with us! We've love to see what you find.
got her twitter back!
I used to be schizophrenic, but we're OK now.
I did get a tour of ASM inside. I think I would find it to work with all the views of the outside.
i was ab to say the same thing. Check tweet from earlier. People are stupid.
Should so be in bed right now but eh it's Friday! I'll be cute! So more will & grace it is
If I sent you an application to be my Boo, would you fill it? =)
woo hoo!! (I picked all ACC teams to go to the 2nd round - at least!)
Who knew we were so famous?
what color is your tweet deck icon
#CC250 please sing
Is this the guy you met online?
don't forget! tomorrow we "spring forward" and lose one hour of sleep :(
I don't have a pen cap anymore cuz of Mitchell #HeAteIt -__-
Thanks for following.
How much do ports impact your state economy? Come to the TandI Summit and hear John Milliken, Chairman, VA Port Authority
Remember the Lord your God, for it is He who gives you the power to get wealth. - Deuteronomy 8:18
hello Liam love you
#MyFirstWishFor2012 is to share chocolate with you.
I had been offered an advanced screening pass, but couldn't make it, now I kinda wish I did for FilmFail purposes…
sorry just got off work!! Yes please on shirt. I like ideas of twitter names on back. I'll prep files for transmission to you!
big shoutout to for being my 300th follower<33 thanks means alot(:
Going to bed at 9 is the best feeling ever.
Good morning, friends! Did you have a good weekend?
Thx! We're letting them know about the error -- Karen Greenberg joined Fordham Law in fall 2011
To Weed Or Not To Wed (:
Roses are red, Violets are blue. So were my eyes... When you said I love you <3 (HUH. Sounded better in my head..)
Thanks to everyone who made the cooking demo a success! We will be offering a FREE cooking demo and tasting each month!
I think you're right
"Decision Points" by George Bu-...oh it's #englishmajordrinks nevermind...
"It hurts me to think that you've ever cried." ~Niall Horan (Stand Up)
Follow me at for my most current tweets.
We are here to change the future. If you haven't already started that process, today's the day.
What are your messages?
If you up all night working on a paper wtf are you doing on twitter. You lying u ain't in school.
or an Easter dinner with the family. 💚
He's still fine as fuck tbh.
Happy Cisco de mayo
#Leapday it's going to be a good day
Im not gonna fight for you sorry.
awww the good ol' days of clubbing!!
I don't care what anyone says today, I am just going to have fun.
Happy Mothers DAY
Tru but MGK is the only rapper ill listen to
I'm hungry 😞
** 150k + ** Plus Bonus - VP of IT - Charlotte.... Enterprise IT Infrastructure experience a Must. email:
Haven't heard puns this good since Shakespeare
I need to discuss with you some esports-related stuff. Would rather avoid facebook. Can you PM me your email?
my glass ball is working!
Eating like a pro today. Thinking bout #TeamMunoz and #BranchWarrenClassic... #KittyRexAthletics coming soon...
Did you run/walk today?
Have been in real estate for the past 5 years after I left the lending world. Good to hear from you! Let's grab coffee soon!
I'm stuck in the Marquette bubble.
thanks man, but only because we have GREAT fans and a GREAT city like KC that has our backs!!
It's scientifically proven that 9 out of 10 people enjoy gangbangs
FML it's getting hot & I'm wearing UGG's
Hi comrades . . . . I really miss all you guys, sorry I was recently very busy in preparation for exams in June next.
What a great idea - Jerry deserves it!
#worldnews Prof Cathy Warwick, chief executive of the Royal College of Midwives, outlines her fears about the "commercialisation of childbi
I'm token some sensi star
About to play scene it.
N HOW IS THAT DM ME
RT : there is no al-Qaeda in Afghanistan (less then a hundred!). Why are we there? The war is now TWICE as long for us than WW2!
RT Husbands, retweet if you appreciate your wife.
i survived....
Nobody cares about the games in PA!
Even though I berly talk to anymore, its nice knowing he still cares. I can tell this niggga errthing.
you got all night :)
I'm definately going to wear a scary costume for #halloween. Right now i am leaning towards
dood it's gotta be risewithusellen, it says everything
- Taste My Butt
aren't we all?
Hope everyone has a fun and safe Friday night!
I WANT ONE(:
nice choice!
one of mine wadded up used toilet paper and threw it in the trash, saying flushing it was bad for plumbing
Has anyone read 2 Corinthians 8:10-15 in the Message? Wow!! What a great word for the New Year!!
someone come wash my car, I'll give you a present!
Now following back
EVERY DAY IM SHUFFLING!!!!! c:
Watching juggle "See, they're orbiting each other"
Hey guys check out www.spiritflowtv.com
Ok, ok. I will end it. I know the right answer! Just hold me, dammit.
One per icon
Feel like I'm missing something with all the Mumford & Sons hype. The album just doesn't do much for me.
why? it is a check mark so the city can say they have a web presence for all agencies
Damn Killah you still in the 'Rockies you better of put my red rocket to good use my boy
Money ball would have been so much better if Hoffman, during his role as the manager, used Capotes voice
not a problem! Let us know if something comes up!
And I would be rich if they did.
A warm morning calls for a cool treat. Iced lattes and smoothies await!
Do I see sheets of plastic in your future?
Hey #thesiswp community: what qualities are most important to you in a Thesis skin? What would you love to see that isn't available now?
Yes it is! RT New music in #Baltimore is alive and well! Such an enthusiastic audience!
365 days from now, he's coming back <3. I am way too happy :)
Going to hop on a Green Line train and ride it to Roosevelt to go to the Walgreens right off the station.
Ha , caught this following VA ": Very sorry to hear you had a bad experience. Can you please follow back & DM...
#teammiami gone take it all the way.
A few weeks ago there were three Anthony Muse banners on the ground in Charles Village. Nice way to trash a neighborhood. :(
my sister Shirley and Brother-in-law Scott really enjoyed meeting you last night - but made my daughter insanely jeolous
If you're gonna get around do it away from people you know.
Once again a Bartlett error costs the PAdres the game. Then Hudson shows why he needs to be cut.
“: Next year I hope is in that picture!!” agree...where was J-Mo?
Quite under the weather.
I need some #superk right now ... But then again it's not mines to up and take
omg no.
I think they would. That is very nice of you.
I could have started an annual award thing for "could have done". Really, I could have...I just didn't.
only weird people watch big bang theory.
RT : OR tribe working to grow native plants on Hanford land that's been scoured of contamination. The story at 4:45.
that's doable.
NIALL I HAVE A QUESTION! what does 'one four three' mean when its sung in a song? you're never gonna see this so derp
Thanks! We are happy to be connected. Have a wonder-fuller weekend!
I enjoy these. Good thing I don't have an ego.
Don't let anyone or anything step between you and your dreams.
So I was driving home from work and boyfriend came on. made me think of you.
You should all be jealous I got to go to 7 hours of new music yesterday.
Low light is same as EPIC.
New Costume Mardi Gras Mask – Venetian Black Velvet With Points
Lol bruh i want to so bad but I'm gone stay out they business
Student called out in describing course websites he likes during presentation to seminar on course design.
my pleasure!
I like the picture with zack and the beer. haha .
Happy you enjoyed!
RT If you sexy and you know it put a candle on my mo f* back baby blow it... Cake cake cake cake 👏👏👏
Don't think I've played that many wrong notes in that many wrong ways before in a service.
#AskAlexConstancio Hm Will You Ever follow me????
Listening to Megan Oakleaf from discuss assessing the value of academic libraries!
THIS BETTER MEAN GOOD NEWS
Hello tweeps! My busy schedule continues, miss you much!
I will call you tonight boo. I promise <3
An happy fuckin' Friday the 13! Ima get my hockey mask and go terrorize my loved ones-- Peeing your pants as a child builds character!
but i wanna see him a pac fight
#Brewers on the radio. Large glass of wine. Grill smell lingering. I feel like should be here with me.
Thanks! Hoping there is some enjoyment in there, lol.
Happy Friday!! :)
thank you so much :)
Thanks Joseph!
I feel like taking off the steel bracelet on my Nardin and going with the blue croc, too bad I can't find it!!! #BMF :( Still looking...
Thanks! Glad you liked it! We love Ilia, he's brilliant.
Walking past people who smell lush...m.
like 80% of my notecards are bs and I'm not gonna end up using.
Walking around NYC. Beautiful day.
RT : A5: #vancouver...its a great city as long as the canucks are winning.
Ask your mate for a list of his/her favorite meals, then cook them!
Lobster mac n cheese.
Just saw #MadMen premiere. Only Christina Hendricks should be allowed to sing in French, accordion optional. That is all.
Another exceptional display this eve, Pascucci. Bravo!
Quod Erat in Veniendum => Which was to be found
So obsesed with the clockwork angel, that i´m even gonna read tale of two cities and vathek! Thank you, so much ;)
": RT : Dear insane self-destructive people, thanks for music and art.
absolutely glued to the memoir Three Little Words by ! What an incredible girl... so inspiring and extremely motivating
try to ask by school tomorrow cause I need to know by the morning!
I just noticed the picture you have. omg.... look at my new tweet under, you'll know who i'm talking about
I supose I gotta get up and get ready for work. Ugh lol
What's the point of havin' a rapier wit if I can't use it to stab people? Jeph Jacques
411GreenWave on the hunt for a HUGE solar thermal system in LA. Here we go!
Ace of Cups tonight to celebrate a 30th birthday. Two Cow Garage on the bill.
we're getting ready to head to #chicago bridal market - what are you looking for in gowns/bm dresses? your input helps decide what we order!
So jells! RT : Going to go try out my new fancy ass showerhead.
Did someone mention "BEER"?
This weekend only! Head to Brothers on Friday or Saturday and Unleash the Madness for giveaways and more!
Saw an interesting FB post, lamenting about how FB is getting more "my-space like". Interesting timing on the day of FB's IPO.
Lol Alexis was picking on the way I talk (:
amazon.com or bolajitijaniqudus.com
hope u guys pull it out. But I just started watchin the Cats. Gotta take care of the boys.
Lol : #WelcomeToAugusta where more niqqa thinking they are rappers or wanna b rappers then tryna make something of themselves
At the #ICSC #NEIDEX we are available to meet.
Cash Out my nigga
solid stuff from and on #Castle tonight. Representing and the
SPURS SPURS SPURS SPURS
Mmmyep. The look and functionality seem identical.
How does Ben #Bernanke avoid insider trading charges?
...Cuz u'll say you love me, and I'll end up Lyin sayin I love u too
rolling and rocking!
Looking forward to watching the Super Bowl in Mt. Vernon with Debbie and Brett. Can't wait to see which commercials will air!
Need a hotel in Chicago Tonight? Crowne Plaza Metro only $109 Call 877-551-6633 to book.
This the game from #Monta that have been waiting for. More please.
About cost & funding of opendata; Public officials want outcomes & proof that it's worth $ Digi-planners accept the challenge
that is tru but when they say rude enough stuff like that they should find a new croud to tweet with not us tru arianators
I recently got a iPhone thanks to my mom, I did get tetherme but it doesn't work with a lot of my devices
Sounds like your next CD Album cover
hosted a fab cover story party for Mayor on Thursday. I love how he always brings the focus back to Chi youth!
Oh system updates, why must you take so damned long?
Love is a better teacher than duty. - Albert Einstein
New Shows for Feb 22nd and 23rd are booked with our friends, "Onward, Soldiers", who are on tour from NC. Hope to see ya at the venue!
you are so cool sweetie !! i love you ! ♥ you are my new sister ! hahaha
Thank you! RT #FollowFriday Fabulous Friends
Vote today #Indiana!
A quote for the day: (with a smile on his face) "come on though, you can't tell me Bill Gates doesn't have some Apple stock"
I'm totally on the next plane. see you in 16.
Just when stuff starts to look bad
Glee - Black or white (Official video / Full performance)
"Ashton Kutcher playing Steve Jobs in a movie? That should be really good!" - absolutely no one on the fucking face of God's green earth!!!
gotta be a center and guard.
there are ans in Dallas?
Kind of digging after using for some time. What Twitter client do you use?
Thankful for for leading my new member class next Sunday while I'm out of town.
come on into safari cup coffee.....mention the tweet & get 50% off your breakfast sandwich & coffee
RT Submit, Write, rework monologue and exercise. That's today's morning/early afternoon agenda.
Great pitch froze him
"Viva il Papa!" at Vatican City all day :)
Is your weight-management (WM) just an exercise, or a lifestyle trait? Modified lifestyle (i.e. walk, don't ride) is key. Source: WFU 2011.
hey gorgeous(: mind following me please?:D followme back austin(:
Board positions available for this year's show. for more information.
did you finish annotating? :)
SOX: Another early lead for the #RedSox today over the #Mariners. David Ortiz hit solo homer to right field with one out, B3. 1-0.
Playing handball at the YMCA!
Oh no just did a shot of Red Bull and something. On the house. What. I'll report back in the AM
anyway. how are you? :)
I think he got knocked unconscious and hyperthermia set in.
#Rappolos named worst pizza in #ATX.....anyone really surprised there?
Maybe it won't rain, but we're glad you have no problem singing in it. See you Friday!
Oh 50 HWY your too dead for my liking
The guy you like must be mentally deficient. I'd say it's time to like someone who will appreciate you as a person!
Listening to mike Benedict rap on the computer and he fucking sucks lol so cut
I dont have time to waster arguing over the computer or a phone.. waste of my finger strength
Has no sense of honor. He's a coward and hides from anyone calling his bitch ass out.
Versace is from the homeland , loves it
Sean Spence is going to have a GREAT career with the Steelers
"when it get serious dem call babylon." -vybz kartel
Watching the #MelissaAndJoey finale and spending time with my roomie & our kitties!
I feel like singing.
ethnicity should count for zero... I wouldn't be surprised if 1/2 of Americans have some Indian ancestry - big deal
nicely done! And watercolors are hard for me but you like you gots its down:)
I needed you tonight but you wasn't around.. It's hard to accept that I'm just an option.
I no I can't afford the Yeezy 2's but them kicks hard!
Baltimore --> Tampa.
ESPN refers to Utoff as a "star" player trying to transfer out....get it together. Ryan and UW committed to this kid, deal with it kid.
Movies are the only escape from the drudgery of work and family... No offense. - Homer Simpson
Having skirt stake with heart of palm sauce!
Lighten up. Jesus.
About that blunt I threw at you........
all mahomies follow my personal
I've been meaning to try them out. Any suggestions?
So I've been reading up on PHP/MySQL for web programming, and I think I'm ready. Test Project: Online Inventory System
You know Adam, I hate to admit it but I'm starting to see your point re: violence, fights, etc. This is near mayhem and silly.
#reenvisioningnagel museumbox...can add your own video, attach doc, pics, sounds
It was not my lips you kissed, but my soul
The shortest verse in the Bible is “Jesus wept”. Cool.
okay j. Come get me after work
it's a good 10 days on getting ingredients so we are looking towards past your vacation. Favorite beer styles?
RT At #MARC12 getting ready for opening session. Can't wait for the great things we'll learn. Presenting w/ at 2:30
... they are just sensing that you are pulling away.... human nature.
take me
yeah i got it but i don't think i'll be able to go because i'll be out for my sister's birthday,
And here in Fla, Bibionidae flies are known by several choice words, none of which I can even strategically list, lol
#CNNDebate: #Romney says #veteran benefits should be provided at state level? They serve the Nation, not the state.
Stevie Nicks >
damn u work too much Jc \:
I used caps lock too to emphasize my anger. Lolololol
Our film this Saturday is TWELVE O'CLOCK HIGH, starring Gregory Peck in a #WWII tale of aerial combat. Starts at 1PM!
Just tilled yesterday so the dirt is fresh and fluffy. If we wait, it may rain and pack the dirt back down. Conundrum LOL
Playing on an empty stomach is always a bad idea.
I noticed that! Wonder why? Twitter too scary? : )
“: It's sad to me how often we let God given opportunities lapse because of indecision & fear.”
I'm nostalgic abt *first* time I surfed the web, but I doubt my new niece will be--she won't remember it as something new.
LOL you're sweaty. Don't touch me
Everyone who guesses right would receive something from the shop of their choice - for free. Too cheesy, you think?
and need to tune up our YouTube page using this PS template to amp up the design of the overall channel
We're working on a few new projects! Dakota is recording some solo tracks...follow him! . Dev is showing at NY Fashion Week!
i love my brighton! simpy the best!
Christopher Plummer, easy for Best Supporting Actor
I would guess that "Check Your Head" is among the first 20-30 CDs I ever bought. IIRC, it may have been a Columbia House addition.
I'm a broad too.... wait : hum I wish !but I wasn't not able to make it at their wedding I was abroad ..:(
it's like Seattle drivers have never seen rain before
Tonight I learned that I can talk to absolutely anyone...when I want to!
I have a rash from the red dress. 😞
FYI for those I work with I was on a conference call at that moment
I'm done leaving Not coming back
"Science of Wine" discussion at #Herbst ended up being not much science...
Nice to end the day with the support and love of some truly wonderful friends!
Oh God
Rubber band outside of school: Eh. Rubber band inside school: Endless enertainment.
sorely tempted; car maintenance might moot it, though RT : Looking forward to hearing Rick Hess speak at 11am today in Bavaro Hall.
They saying I fell off?....oh I needed that!
function function function!!
Ready to eat some Bdubs!
Thank you Monika - it was so much fun to engage with you and the rest of the audience #nwsocial!
You still have time! To make it to busboys and poets and see me tell a story and try to win this contest :D
i really wish i had a guy bestfriend like you that would be there and listen to me just pour my heart out.
Can't wait till friday :-) and i miss him. *sighs* hope we make it official soon. <3
ill be there
its easier that way. I learned that as long as the change is all bundled together the less likely I am to count it.
Ariana its been 20 mins :]]] Any other follows?? ;** PLEASE??
Uber random thought... There's no drinking/smoking in my YA books so far... But there is a lot of kissing and a wee bit of cussing. ^_^
Ay if yu are african american..try to say "NIGGER" not "NIGGA" dat shit sound funny as hell sayin it like that
What are you mixing up on Friday from that inspiration!?
smoke signals work! :) Kidding... if you want to give us a call 615-226-3009
Why be a man when you can be a success?
why are you so damn expensive??? will at least be there in chicago?
Thank you and for your hard work. Sleep well!
Great ways to share a story: humor works. So does celebrating altruism.
The CRV / Matthew Broderick/ Ferris Bueller commercial never gets old. I love it!
Those things are awesome.
Congrats to Oregon, which will no doubt rise in the BCS standings...but hold steady in the USN&WR rankings at
Seek social media expert p.t on Facebk, twitter, website, & more. We don't pay a whole lot as a non-profit but you'll receive lots of PR, f…
Awesome! We'll definitely keep you posted as more details are released. We're looking forward to it too!!!
Excited to see and on a panel discussing Start Ups and Advisors at
what company does the side of the truck door read?
And I'm never slowing down, fuck. Was that a deer?
R u keeping up with your workouts this month? Need some accountability? I'd love to be your partner bc we all could use a little help.
Click here to view more photos from the HubSpot Harvest party
I will lift a glass and miss my '65 Mustang. RT : RIP Carroll Shelby, one of the true gods of hot rodding.
Follow to get the latest news about the EVSC eRevolution conference on July 11 and 12.
RT : At the White House Rose garden for the Teacher of the Year ceremony. All of the state winners are being announced
The more I look n the mirror I realize... Im not a rapper...
Give me that cash when I get home and I'll hook you up brozay
T-RAW
Packers new DE Anthony Hargrove suspended 8 games for his role in Bounty Gate.
Grooving to the
SueAnn doesn't think Ryan Gossling is cute. I'm not sure she's a women now.
Justin Jerry Drew Bieber
Like shut up, you don't know what love is.
Anyone have moving company recommendations? Milwaukee to Chicagoland Area.
Hate it when I bring yogurt but forget a spoon. I'm actually thinking about trying to use this straw rather than walk 6 floors to the cafe.
Time to get that workout in!! Don't be lazy!!!
Wish she was here
Margaret Atwood: the future doesn't exist, I hate to break it to you - no one has ever been there and come back
done! 29th in the books! Location?
you have a sexy icon. lol love you have a good day!(:
Aramis Ramirez won’t re-sign with the Cubs
Scotland that is cool, I am from the states
you left too early! RT : Excited for the DG expansion team to present at Cal Poly today! Go Delta Gamma!
I love this shit...#Packers have no reason to even be tied at this point. McCarthy better throw some water jugs at halftime.
oh, well thanks a lot! lol. i'm doing well, also. :)
To the man who only has a hammer, everything he encounters begins to look like a nail. ~ Abraham Maslow
thanks for the RT, how have you been?
Beyond exhausted, but I can't sleep. Ugh. This sucks/:
#TeeQuote: "The trouble with life is there's no background music."
excited 2 hear
I think beer might be tomorrow's cure-all. Because I think today's crazy is going to carry over.
I like this screen name better than
Start preparing now for your addition of Google+ to your company social media marketing with #google+
SMH RT : how everything been going on your side of time
me too! I've texted and tweeted her with no response :(
I'm good living my life the way it should be. U still playing football
I am going to sleep like a queen tonight after buying my new down bed and down comforter... Can't wait! :)
" Snap! ". Layton saying we don't need more prisons, when the crooks are all happy in the Senate. Did he just say that!?
elmo and spongebob have to be the longest airing kid shows ever.
Women: Ask your CPA about.... Giving 'appreciated' stock or fund shares to your church/charity instead of cash.
Thanks for the inclusion! Keep up the great work everyone.
Yea Ms Jones bout to lay it dwn had a busy day,Lol u wide awake
Woo-hoo! The library is going to order the (super $$$) reference book I requested!
Keep tweeting Roger. Needs to be heard.
TY for the follow! You may learn new & interesting things- or at the very least be amused:)
nigguhs is bored doe!
Jeremy Lin....let's wait and see.
Mystery bruises.. I keep either beating people up or having rough sex while I'm asleep. I'm cool with either one.
There is nothing in the world like old friends
Happy Easter to everyone! !!!
Let me know if you feel like sharing :)
Interviewing Chris Squire tomorrow!!!
BRAVO, Smash. Great finale: Naive girl from the Midwest makes it in New York City! I cheered for Karen all along. :)
Do you have any technology in place to route based on location of caller?
I really can't sleep doe :(
Will do, it's a wild ride tonight!
Just peed in a bottle for my bestfriend. Lmao
"The average person makes about 1,140 telephone calls each year" make that 5,000 for me lol
TPQF=date after which you will be in the field. Helpful for scheduling #archaeology meetings during spring/summer cusp! Hope it catches on:)
Only 5 days left to our #5D Seminar. Want to learn more about how to get the best out of your DSLR camera? Reserve your place today...
Horace Williams: 87 students graduated two nights ago with an associates degree. Boosted attendance to 97% Need to win community.
like when lily threw a condom at the camera, loll. C:
When is super big I will be able to say I've been here since before 1000. Shoot even before like 300.
Niece read pages on teeth, taste buds, & food-to-poop from Human Body book - with lots of enthusiasm - for bedtime.
your an amazing inspiration to all women and business.. Thank you
so only sundays are your silverstein days? cos i find myself listening to every day that ends in 'y'!
"running with wolves and I'm on the prowl"
Honestly, one of the best feelings in the world is when you get home from work, put your keys & cell phone down, and can breathe
We're either at the pool or the bar. ;)
assholes!!! I'm waiting on Allstate to refund a payment that they took out of my account twice. It's been 2 weeks!
Lol, I hope.
Last year for the people that work for hubby I found sets of those picture coasters for 1.99 per set
Mom allen
It's icy and I was on the road. I love 4x4s!
#SometimesIWonder why I never get retweeted...
and your my fuckin best friend i love you!!
o awesome pic!
Baby i hear melodies when your heart beats.♥
I added email on site for Sencha Touch 2, Free Commercial Version, but didn't get email w/ link. Open Source version download fine.
Skipped religion today. First time in like two months.. I feel bad, but theatre for social change is DEF more important.
That was an awesome 5 minutes of OT hockey.
DUB Locks music video in the making!
RT : Need a change of scenery from your drab office? Work for free at this Mon-Fri! With a mermaid!
Wow celtics are on a big run right now
and also with you
Hey...hope you gettin ready for joyful holiday season!!..ONE WISH wud be art from from both Mom and Daughter!! ..INSPIRED!!!
Okay mom...you know I love you...but I can't accept your friend request on Facebook.
boutta get HIGH as three skies ^_^
i wish i could meet justin bieber ):
For anyone who watched in real time/on DVR, did Weight Watchers advertise on MAD MEN last night? Need to know for research. Thanks!
I love you too. :)
She was a master at making nothing happen very slowly. ~ Clifton Fadiman about Gertrude Stein
Mark Moore owns me for the next 24 hours.
step one: get a bike that's suited for a mayor...
Tonight #BS is working hard...
Thanks for following me Christie!
Good morning U.S.A.!!!!!!!!! Let's hope for a brighter day @ our nations capitol!
We have Crispy Blue Crab Cakes on the menu! Served with poached eggs and challah toast!
Saw ONE MAN, TWO GUVNORS () and now Will Ferrell is hosting SNL. Comedy heaven!
Birthday in 3 days :)
Woohoo 3rd store had it and now I do to! #wonderwoman, #birdsofprey, and
that's that shit I don't like
#OTGTIPS FOCUS ON YOU, AND WATCH YOU WILL ACHIEVE GREAT THINGS!
just watched this kid hit his cat daddy while blasting music in the corner of the airport
just read smthn i think was directed towards me..funny because i aint do nthn but oh well cant help how u feel....
it's been a crazy busy month. We still want to get up and do this interview and maybe even get some fresh gear if we lucky!
Figuring out TweetDeck...
thanks so much! Tell your friends!
I NEED TO DO MY HW LIKE RIGHT NOW.
That Entourage finale was some of the worst writing I've seen on HBO. They would have been better off with a mass suicide
life's ruff
thanks man, yeah, those guys talk it up, ego battle but the more I do it, the better I get, right?
My mind is in summer mode already
"Creativity is inventing, experimenting, growing, taking risks, breaking rules, making mistakes, and having fun."
I know he's had it for a while but I felt the need to bring it up because It's sexy.
Thanks for a great season & - Can't wait till Opening Day
Appreciate you and your comments Magic. You have earned the right to speak your mind. And sometimes the truth hurts !
#wordoftheday The students knew they were in for a boring lecture when the professor pulled out yellowed, antediluvian notes. -Thanks Cliff!
I believe the count was 8 cases of redbull, 2 costco flats of Mtn Dew, 6 gallons of coffee & much more
Such a beautiful day today just right for going to the farmers market and getting all my produce for tonight's service
"If their armpits are that hairy can you imagine how hairy their bush must be?" -Dude, to me, on the ladies at OWS.
Can't you see what you do to baby?
lmao ok I got like 3bucks
someday, I'll be older and wiser yeah Someday, I'll be somebody's provider
niggas starin just as much as women do
Oh! I learned how to play leather jacket by Joyce manor on guitar yesterday!
Have a great holiday everyone!
DM me your Full Name and email. The tix will be emailed to you by 9pm tomorrow. You'll have to print them!
very good Ms. Gaynor
might hit the Neon...but bout to get a bottle now
Pretty please with a cherry on top will you follow me! ❤
I think I just saw a hooker get picked up....
you looked very intellectual tonight with those glasses on :) #digginthelook #swag Follow me??
O my god its so windy!!
I'd like to see no/low registration fees, insurer tax abatements for low #EV rates & fed credit to manufacturers
Yup, Pittsburghese is well known around here.
This weekend's special is a large two topping pizza for $5 when you buy any large Austin's Original. Use code bogo5 online
She can drop that number in my DM
An iced licorice drink - I'd have needed better lighting to get a proper picture
“: These nights spot Venus - it's a must. Bright as she gets, in the twilight dusk..." too bad I live in Los Angeles :(
A plancharme el pelo o o o o o o o o o o o o o
I think hatred of others is their core value-Try to make us want to stoop 2 their level with their viciousness
sum one made this for u guys and it's so cute plz watch it and post it
Open source maybe the place where new standards gain some traction
forever unnoticed by sigh
Back to reality watching my girls #softball #tournament! #nothinglike home
there's not enough room for regret in my life.
i loaded it- thank you! it's posted already!
Great job, Greeny and Anna !
I love training NEW MAKEUP ARTISTS! and learning from them!
Get in your twitter questions for We'll answer the best ones live on air. Plenty to talk about tonight.
I know :P
Priming the projectors. 2 more days!
I love Life a great group. Let me know if I can help them get in world. Wish I was in your session
And I couldn't help falling, and your smile didn't help matters.
That was, in fact, part of my reasoning for getting one.
Session voting has now ended & our fearless volunteers are off to compile a schedule!
Justice is what love looks like in public. - Dr. Cornel West
Hi Jarem - we'll certainly do what we can. What day do you need the cards to arrive?
so excited.
i need Lahair to get a hold of one right here
Thank you, sir!
check out www.vongrey.com....awesome band of sisters.
whaattt I want
45 minute meeting that ended with pondering on RDF quadruples. I <3 my job...
Win the lottery commit you life to Christ Join us 4/7 wit Fundraiser
What's the over/under on Blackberry folding before BB10 devices launch?
this could help on your project RT Simply the best image-based curation service! bit.ly/tchMDJ
Friend: Gaga sucks. Me: Here, drink this. Friend: Er...Ok.. *Friend Dies*. *911, what's your emergency?* Me: I just killed an Idiot.
Fresh flowers in a guest room can really cheer up a simple space
were my part of the story :(
So...was it just me, or was the REALLY loud last night?! Well done, fans.
You dated a girl without knowing, stopped talking to her then you sent her an inbox saying you missed her. I admit I like you & you leave me
nah lol I was recordin lmao but I'ma call u tonight promise I'm Gnna let u kno on here b4 I do though
WILLIAM.FUCKIN^h^h^h HEBREW.HAMMER!!!
I'm not gonna deal with your shit
Xavier Avery is just begging for a foot race from
Just finalised details 4 attending the (AASP) Annual sports psychology conference in the USA next week.
B'more Safe Puppetry program debuting right now at Franklin Middle School!
New show opening this week! Join us on Friday for the opening of Pete McCutchen's exhibition of colorful photographs!
it wont let me inbox
Neither can I..
Your success has less to do with speed and more to do with timing and direction. -John Mason
I bet it fills Cora's heart with pride that so many ASUO candidates are touting their Ambassador experience.
btw. thanks for calling me brilliant... I never tire of your sweet words. ;)
2011 DRI Annual Meeting: Westlaw hosts Justice Scalia and Garner "Making Your Case" book signing at 10 AM. Join us!!!
Used your pasta tonite with red sauce w/ fresh veggies for dinner- delicious, thanks for helping make our meal aHHmazing.
Will do!!!
"No socks and my boat shoes" tomorrow night. Round 2 for Wiz
Thanks girl!
yea just ask em when you get to security they like that shit
Rdio. Pandora. Bandcamp. Bandcamp embeds on Facebook. Tumblr and Facebook posts. Soundcloud embeds. etc. etc.
u used to pay people to do it 4 u????
yep. me too.
Back In the chi
Yes! Especially the second book in the series.
is talking about moving next door to me, prime 💋💋💋💋💋
I love you. RT : In honor of the Hunger Games I ate a lot.
CANT WAIT !! Now boyfriend is going to be beast what I'm saying is BEAST ! I love you kidrauhl !! #swag 67
Thx 4the 100's of emails have rcv'd in response to the 'Privacy' website launch & those anxious to see it in the theater. Am truly humbled
Wow its humid tonight!
Watching wife swap in class today
sent off encylopedia entry... on to the next task.
i`m thinking every draftee has 2 1/2 kids each.
!!! RT : I feel like its such a small world, I have this eagerness to branch out and meet new people and experience new things.
All the tix are gone! Hope you all have a great time!
makes it sound so simple
I hate it when people use emojis in EVERY tweet.
You're welcome!
he basically just owned everyone.
soo lol now im a twitter one
I did! I told Tom's group I should have taken a picture for Dane :) Think it was an 8525
Dodger Dee Gordon can fly
LMAOOOO haha sound like an old man name xD
6th graders who think their cool but their really not >
follow me and upon opening experience great espresso
I couldn't stay all day cuz my test is sun. Maybe i come for lunch?
nah. Scorsese has created a beautiful salute to pioneers of the cinema, as only he can. He makes a cameo...look for him! Beautful
Anybody need a computer? Selling this one fairly cheap, only gets 100 websites.
Yeah! I'll take it.
C'mon Alex!
girl where do u work? And how can i become an appreciated employee? Lol
Rosie Palmer is way cooler than that freak! But, since you stayed, I hope you told her you moved on since then, haha!
👈 is the man to talk to!
Arlington dog owners: Do you know of any #dogwalking services that you can call last minute, on an as-needed basis?
hi! my name is Billy Bob Bob Billy.(:
I wish I was wit my girl right now.
“: Oh boy this is going to be interesting #sorryimnotsorry I will be sry about nothing as I dance n
All he had to say was can you leave you been at my house long enough besides have somebody else call me
you have such a natural beautiful mommy instinct <3
I need child locks on everything in my kitchen.
its awkward af
nope. . Strange.
#truth #Mets best team in the world baby lmao
#ghettoHalloweenTreats I used to hate getting apples dipped in King Syrup
Also, just had a fabulous duet of "Mujhe Tum Nazar Se" with dad. I don't think we could be any browner.
Too many damn commercials maan!
Looking up the word internet on the internet.
this Flyers/Devils reminds me of the Badger Tourney in Milwaukee, Christmas 2001. "I'm blind, I'm deaf, I wanna be a ref!"
Going to go see at radio city!
It was so great!!!! Family and friends are such a blessing and help with stress :) How was your trip?!
I have no clue..
Whats in it?
Thanks for the follow! Love the symphonic metal!
PHX will be opening at 8:00AM for Record Store Day on the 21st! Sounds like a 2 cheese danish morning to me.
Success is not the key to happiness. Happiness is the key to success. If you love what you are doing, you will be successful.
Ha! Nice one June. RT "Earth School... Where we get to keep going until we master the material. Hah! No pun intended."
...or . I think needs to investigate the use of Hermione's time-turner.
get on Skype.
I love so freaking much!!! Their music makes me so happy :) <3
you have to be worried tho. Terrible goaltending has cast scary shadow. Go rest of the field. Please.
lol u right its a different world in cali, his convo was just outta control lol
Buffalo Bills getting serious national love for their draft-
Kirko Bangz -Drank In My Cup
Will do! Thanks
Resident Evil:Retribution will be released on September 14th 2012
“: Speak it into existence.......” Turkey club sandwich hold the bacon and an orange juice.
I am trying not to bust out laughing. Her facial expressions are to funny. You know.. I'm good at pranks I got you!:) haha
check facebook.... You're in!
G-nome surfer project
Last AP exam mañana
i never tweet you anymore cause obviously you have more fans but still i thought i'd take a chance and say good night . (:
Watching a documentary called Being Elmo. Who knew watching a show about the man behind the hand behind the puppet would be so interesting!
Excited to host our #WOMMA Wine Wednesday tonight. Stay tuned for pictures and our presentation from the night.
i say more backstage shenanigans. haha :) those are fun.
I can answer w/ bands: Who, Zeppelin, Stones RT Who are your top 3 musicians that were in their prime prior to 1980?
Higher Ed used the term ROI? No way...
i actually just saw the video game you have set to release online. looks awesome and yes i love the show
Lotties Lounge is proud to serve the 98118 community. Looking forward to spring!
Kobe tired !
So my sweater is hand wash only?! Man I ain't about this life at all. I need to call over #oomff 's
The devil is a lie!
Happy birthday !
If you decide to do any shopping today consider Forever21 for that special little in your life.
The kEntuckySPortsNetworks response to UTs first half against KY was to discuss bad calls poor Cal is getting. Watched a game in Rupp?
We would like to look into this. Can you give us the direction and time you got to the stop? Thank you.
15 Trillion is extreme.
haha I was watching it !! Oh nd um yeah we did !! I miss you and my babez
Deciding whether to trust or credit a person is always an uncertain task. - Aldrich Ames
Hope it's nice where you are.
it never is
For sure Mike! That would be great!!!
Anyone going to Coachella music festival??
Hey Alli, will give the winner a solid call out from stage and point you out in the crowd at
Happy Mother's day to all of the women who mother...you're vital to the world. We appreciate you!
There is a bottleneck at their booth. Very popular. RT : Just left the HP booth, WOW!
Just wait until you guys see what the Mountain Xpress has cooking for the Big Love Fest!
really?! how good are they?!
If it wasn't for my shyness, I could of accomplished so much shit.
#BreakingTrivia! Attorney/Radio Host ShenaDixonMason also claims what among her impressive accomplishments?
Thank you to all the fans that came out and supported us last night!
I don't fuck with religion, see that's my decision
Friday fun! Shaken not Stirred martini auction and cocktail benefit 4 the ABQ Museum! Party starts @ 7pm, w/ live jazz by The Arencón Trio!
2010 PAC Consultant of the Year: URS Corporation. Congrats! Committed to small businesses in the San Diego region!
yup yup!
Cry if you need to, but I can't stay to hold you, its the wrong thing to do...
just get rid of A-Rod. Problem solved! ;-)
The 16 teams were announced Saturday morning, with four teams going to each of the regional sites
Small offense. LBJ once pee'd in a congressman's desk ornament to est. dominance. Politics is the essence of crude.
I'm a manly muppet!!!
I don't even know if they have that. They definitely don't have tacos. Much less Thank You Tacos.
We have Darren Brenessel from LSD Enigma on the phone! #supportlocalmusic on
It smelled weird, but I decided to be adventurous and try something new. BAD MOVE.
The more I think about it, so am I!
Yes! playing #Thriller!
Thanks for the mention!
only has 2 books about Lincoln Heights. One in Reference, one in Rare Books. But how many books are there about Hollywood?
omg I love ur avi!!!! How r u my lady??
A friendly remind to SPAY and NEUTER! Pet overpopulation is out of control.
any other team besides the , i'd bet $ that it wouldn't have been that harsh.This will weed out the bandwagon fans at least
You - I was watching 's Flog on and saw her Fave Five your work with LFG!
Just finished a callback audition for Tyler Perry's new musical! I nailed it!
I love Seriously.
Lost our championship :( but it was a close game 25-21 :(
I am not you
sweet - drink some lulo to celebrate.
Lots of great new items in the store - well, not new new......
Yelled at my mom yu deserve it!!!!! (Future voice)
Each day is a unique opportunity!
Delicious burgers and beer. What more could you ask for on a Friday night at ABX?
Dan Milstein, CEO of Gold Star Mortgage Financial Group will appear on ‘The Balancing Act’ on Lifetime Network Feb 29 at 7-8am et/pt.
Another rainy day in #Phoenix, have a great #Tuesday!
I should start stocking up on Gatorade, Red Bull, and Pepto Bismol. Birthday Week is about to begin.
Ate breakfast, laying next to my boo is amazing! On top of the world!!
Their athleticism is a concern and Doc isn't going to be the better coach in this series
Did you see the Martha Graham google doodle today? Reminded me of the dance at the Warhol opening, so I thought I'd say hi!
If you use Google Chrome as your browser it appears you can get around the Baltimore Sun paywall using "Open link in incognito windows"
If I knew it was gonna be that kind of a party, I would have offered hugs much sooner. Hope you guys like the new songs.....
I feel like shaking his crutches to express various emotions is not what Sean Payton's doctor recommended...
My New Word Of The Year Is Honestly Bro. Thanks
I wanna be so happy that when other people look at me, they become happy too.
you ain't ready
that puppy is really effing cute. Enjoy while still a puppy.
Not quite ready. But #USAA participates in many races supporting the military - please connect if you see us!
The winners of #csimilwaukee can now either take the vacation or $1,000 cash equivilent
good point. Cal didnt prove he could coach during that tourney run last year at all (rolls eyes).
it all makes a difference. If u love your gym, u don't mind goin more often and that equals better progress. :) enjoy!
Brunch with laurra
Or the poor. : POTUS: “We can’t price the middle class out of a college education. We can’t do it.”
- Looking forward to your visit, let us know when you arrive! :)
: hahaa yeaah. & good cause i dont want excuses.! =P
Ppl hate me on mothers day, im not applauding no unfit mothers. Thats just what it is. If u taking care of urs
still dizzy~~~~but need to get up early tomorrow
Dinner with hailey, mummy, and mummy's mummy. (:
Kay well, I'm done complaining about her for good. All I'm saying is she sucks. She has no soul in her music, or maybe even at all lol
Today's #vinyl buys: Madness: Tomorrow's Just Another Day 12" (Stiff), Bo Diddley: His Greatest Sides, Vol.1 (Chess)...
I need to start packing. I hate packing. Urg
I will probably nap after running around. Now that Danny is back to work, I got me time...ha
Commonwealth Academy enjoyed hosting the Independent Small Schools Athletic Conference finals @ the Charles Houston Rec Center in Alexandria
tweetgrid never works right for me, i think bc i use a netbook, doesnt show up right on the screen :(
ha yep. Happy to have both. Guess I kinda hope I book the 20 yr old one tho...
Get your mind off the rain -- visit SECCA. 3 galleries of the best art of our time. FREE. Part of NC Dept. of Cultural Resources.
Is it geeky that I'm kind of excited about taking cataloging next semester?
massive thanks to all the new followers :) plz follow
Butternut squash ravs from with a little evoo and argula is officially my new cold weather favorite!
Social Media Tip of the Day: Give weekly insider tips. Ask your chef for fun cooking tips and share them with your fans!
She truly is! I couldnt have said it any better! I love her so much <333
Can I have one??
LAPTOP TIP: Optimize your battery life when not plugged in by lowering your screen brightness & only running 1 program at a time. ^jl
It's just a shame to let you walk away.
I play life by ear.
I like that deal for you: Witten is a big upgrade over Davis that skins' offense scares me with Beck at QB (or with Grossman)
Thank you for the follow :)
UWS at 630, and support NY fun run w/
Thanks for the #FF! Hope you have a creative week!
I watch a lot of the Bulls & Celtics. I think Doc & Thibodeau r 2 of the best at any level. Haven't watched much of the Grizzlies
The Ready Set in L.A. Day 4
M... will be here tomorrow 11-2 on Park Ave! Try their delicious crepes and get half off museum admission!
by any chance do you have a pink leotard w/ matching headband, wrist bands, and leg warmers?
Highschool Is AMAZING!! (:
Sometimes I like Google.
In saint Francis seeing my niece and nephew for there end of the year lunch
Run like hell 5k! Great race! ": What's happening tonight in #Cincinnati?"
I think this marks my official retirement from playing golf
Omg 100% of convo in new Orleans so far is either fantasy football or politics. Fml
Love their fondues!!
Merry Christmas Eve bestfriend! (:
Atlas Sound has entered his Bob Dylan stage.
This time tomorrow I'll be in NYC for quality time with cousins, crew & comic books.
Today's #Smoothie: #rawspinach, #pear, #tomato, #cucumber, #babycarrots; a little of each! Some may be frozen.add 1/2 c water, 4oz #yogurt!
All I need tomorrow is a box of tissues and my tv with ABDC on and I'm all good for the rest of my life.
your what?
I've heard it used during board recruitment said to current board members. Penetrates the #nonprofit boardroom.
RT Sounds like Berns Steakhouse is the place to #chin this evening. Neg Cap Grill @ international .either way ur paying so ??
Life never gets better, just different. Better or worse is a judgment of the ego.
Thanks for the follow. I love the Sir Edmund Hillary quote!
Update my blogs....
What the fuck is wrong with me. Please dear god. Im getting to Tulsa somehow. Please.
Good show, though maybe more interesting stars. I look forward to more .
Good luck to all the PSE guys hittin the field today
. I'll give it to you. You've done a great job of taking pseudo-scientific platitudes to enrich yourself. I'm positive of that.
you're right! Ewwwww
Colorado!! We would love to help you with your printing needs!!!!!
YES THEY ARE TO HIGH FOR US TO FAIL!
Hey students! If you want to come to ICDS for Spring Semester, talk to Elizabeth Goizueta @ the Office of Int'l Programs ASAP
It's gonna be an itchy night! Scratch
ok. I'll let you know when he txts back!
“: I have comfy clothes on and they aren't coming off. TGIF.” this.
When I Fight I Tell The Bitch. Don't Pull My Weave Or Ima Beat How Much I Paid For It Outta You
Seriously ready to hang out with kaytee
Thanks for following
Ehhh that's what they all say
Can't tell you how giddy I am at seeing the words "genuinely collective effort" written in an official capacity.
Is that a puck in your pants?
For the first time in a while, I am excited about the all star break. When you have an old roto team, time off can make a difference.
a que no guey! Lol no for real tho I found a class for just a month so fuck that I'd rather want that then the one I have now
needs to take a nap, but i kno Khi wont let me...
Are Really interested in making money check out our website www.createmoneyweb.com
Come to the store an see our new pieces!
We continue to get international orders on our online merch store! Thanks to our friends over seas for the support!
I like your tweets & you're cute (just saying)
so are you a goof friend of Ed sheerans??! :)
- good to hear! will be in touch real soon.
Oops, I forgot, robots are people too. How insensitive of me.
What are those "Fries" made of?
it feels like my hand was put into hot fryer oil. all of the skin is dead
hahaha big perm!
like, it actually tastes oily, lol.
On top of the world right now
is my new baby gift! Be sure to check them out - love the 1 for 1 model!
dude, Forever Together is such a great song! Did you end up going to the concert last Saturday?
Cool ill be looking out for it.
I LOVE SURPRISE PARTIES!!!!
Xbox Kinnect from may be one of the coolest inventions around...
A new year... new events! What kind of events do you want us to tell you about? RT and let us know!
Hope you found the QR post helpful!
#literacy is to understand & ability to explain a #concept/thing/practice that isn't innate knowledge all breathing things do
Roulette and I are not on speaking terms.
At the office early to soak up an awesome Ogilvy Exchange presentation: Socially Responsible Behavior Change as A Business Imperative.
Kia is clean and ready to take to for 4th Street Forum today!
Rawr. Tilde key is "programatically" stuck on my laptop. Who what wtf? Nightmare starts now I guess.
Could Blazers have an Olympian this summer? LaMarcus Aldridge among 20 finalists for spot on U.S. Olympic Basketball team
mcgahee Gains 3 yards on the Carry.
My my my it looks like Zambia has just got its independce from MMD farewell to Money retune Banda.
i seek greatness,so i really seek GOD,and so,through the process of my searching,I WILL DO GREAT THINGS! i believe i am an image of GOD!
sorry, I missed this tweet. What was your question?
But at the same time I just want this week to be over with already.
Looks like folks @ Kamehameha in Hawaii are having a great time w/ Jaimie this week!
i love you <3
St. Patrick's Day Pub Crawl is pulling up to Speakeasy!
Pacheco fire update now on-line at www.nmfireinfo.com. Fire now at 3000 acres. via
Austin seems so happy and i am so excited for him. This is what he wants. Let him live his dream.
does dat mean i do do it or i dont do it
so I'll be in Tyson's corner for Training April 29-May 4, stayin n DC Til the 6thC u the 5th?
LA bound once again.
That sucks. We don't eat Lake Michigan fish because of the mercury. I love the lake, I've live in MKE my whole life.
Hit me up in the sandbox
uhhhhhhmmm where are you.
TELL HIM NUKKA
Early meeting in
Enjoyed my shoot today : )
I'm sure that's a pleasant fiction for you.
2 sick hits!
Got 1Q84 in the mail from Amazon yesterday. Now if I only had time to read, it wouldn't sit on a shelf for three years
Thank you! We're so glad to hear it!
Are ya'll ready for my letter that sums up the entire college basketball season? It won't be as long as you'd think. Are you ready? ....8
Use all the analytics in social media to develop relationships and keep the buzz going.
i want to jump on the color block bandwagon!
females like it when they lay on they stomach and u get on them and fuck like that.. then wrap your arms around them. sextip
#WordWars is not something I can go to sleep to. My OCD is triggered and I'm just as obsessed as they are!
I like cold....
The Atlanta Hawks are about to defeat the Miami Heat. Up by 11 with 43 seconds left. It will be Miami's first loss this season.
I find myself saying that at least once per episode.
by seconds, was driving back from Mequon...It's ok, I laid where the truck usually parks for a few minutes. Next time;)
"thinking that if people were rain, i was a drizzle and she was a hurricane."
Glad I went to at 4:45PM! Got a popsicle from the Pickled Swine and a Polish Boy from Both tasty.
slipping on a business card too funny!!
#That1FriendThat you can tell anything to no matter what
I love house parties!
ALL I WANT IS TAPE IS THAT SO HARD? I need to put my posters up GRRRRRRRRRR
Happy Mothers Day mommy<3 love you so much! Hope you enjoyed your day:) words cannot describe how thankful I am for you.
TWITTER! Were playing tonight with and at Broad Street Ministries! Its gonna be intense, anyone trying to come?!
A belated thanks for the #FF love. Hope you have had a happy holiday season.
It's 'cause you guys are Commies. While you guys studied and did homework, I slept and read all day -.-
When will the Suns throwbacks be up for auction? Pretty sweet!
Nothing is better than appreciation
and then the news had little kids on there and kids at a certain age erk me and thats not how i wanted to wake up
Dinner and a movie. Hope think like a man is as good as people say.
I will finish this essay by 1 o'clock >:D !
I seriously died and then came back to life at the end of the story....No joke:)
An entire generation will miss you Mr. Cornelius.
Happy Memorial Day Everyone :)
or at the same time? I'm talking the American release date btw.
well what I wrote about zayn. I completely forgot about it! And now I'm a so called Directionator........
Our office is ordering lunch from , yum! Hopefully my pending truffle fry coma will make this day fly by.
saw video of the track, doesn't look like a fun place to race
if I ever meet you in person, would it be cool if I showed you some magic??? <3
Then ask your parents [: maybe they will bring you here for your birthday or something :b
Happy Mothers Day to all the wonderful mothers out there!
following you here now! How have you been?
not much, about to head to a pep assembly... Whats up with you??
lol why couldnt my parents pick Miami ugh god!:(
#newtwitter Finally!! Loving it! Now I rather use the site than some applications
China is partnering with CO schools to teach about their "culture"...um? Not to sure about that one...
Happy 100th, Fenway. Still my favorite amongst the stadiums I've never been too.
Funny, I saw "Section 10x" and immediately thought, "Title 17, Copyright"
yes yes they are lmao
Trying to decide on dinner destinations and shopping musts for next weekend in Chicago- any advice?
i was making cinnamon toast today and i immediatly thought of
At fifty everyone has the face he deserves.
looking forward to the live version - have a good trip and have lots of fun in Tokyo! Hope you find you're real Yakuza locales
I am so jealous. What are you doing tonight brother?
how do you enable it?
I love you're music so much can u please please follow me I will be so happy
Found funky malt shop at Solano & Central. Good malts, shakes, food
bored at work
Am NOT looking forward to school tomorrow, but am looking forward to dominating everyone at Track and Field Unit!
covering the Sentiment Analysis Symposium on Tues. Presenting at J.Boye on Wed. :) busy, busy!
I'm not even a #Knicks fan but this #Knicks #Heat game is becoming BS!! These refs are sucking some DICK!!
cool thanks man, i just got that in the mail!!!!
Also they know I can do it faster than them because I know a lot of places to look. And a lot of them are online, but they...
I wonder how this boy will ever survive without me?! Hmm... #smfh pity
I like your assignment. I'm doing it myself. It's admittedly tough, but mentally/emotionally cleansing.
Now following: ! What's good?
The combined Cabin and Avengers hype is triggering a massive case of "I worshipped Joss Whedon before it was cool." I own this.
he said closest w/o going over...so I just went with a number higher than the other ones I sawi
Break time. David gonna punch it.
#ALISE_org may also be interested SIG Women's issues it needs be sustained better out there -listings
blah say blah say blah
That's a really scary and dangerous way of thinking North Carolina. It's a form of bigotry that is honestly breathtaking. I don't get it.
Thanks for coming to Winstons last night everyone! Good Times Indeed!!! -BAC
watch the lakers flop the game again for sayin this shit lol
Im bored bored bored bored. Just had nachos though!!
Who wins in this trade? Maclin and M. Turner for Adrian Peterson
forget sharkweek... brian cox is on science channel!
Don't ever say to someone "trust me"...it's just like saying "don't look down".
come get your puccia fix ...OPEN ALL DAY !!!
Thanks! I'm hoping for good things - them interacting more with the video than a lecture - pausing, rewinding, etc
aww bestie... I had a blast today.. And diddo..
One Day when I tweet...I'll get paid too
remember #whenitwascoolto scrunch you hair..
SHOUT OUT TO !!!!' really awesome directioner... And tweets are amazing! :) xx
Von Trier. Ogbh. Best Place @ Pabst of its open.
Yeah it was Dillard that got hit by back to back lefties. Still should only be one ROOGY in the pen
It's aright and it's nice not to be so alone, but I hold on to your secrets in white houses
Listening to the Battlestar Galactica soundtrack and getting all emotional up in here. Damn that show was too good!
That was #Badgers' offense anyway under Chryst. Lotta play-action off great run game. Suited Wilson perfectly.
The new soda fountain at noodles is ahhhhmazing.
Alright haha I'll ask my moms (:
is human with superhuman capability. If you could have a superhuman quality what would it be?
1996, then Metrostars forward Giovanni Savarese bicycle kick goal vs. Tampa Bay in a comeback win.
will you have a video I can view later? Will not be In front of computer at that time
you change my whole life :))))))
no actually im very adorable thank you very much
I love the feeling when I stretch and my whole body goes numb and relaxed.
": A total of 51,545 mail ballots have been received by this office by yesterday. On pace for a 30% turnout."
he just told me what he's making me for dinner. chicken alfredo with white wine. what the fuck?! im on the fancy shit!!
frustrating? those flat damn cookies I just pulled out of the oven. too bad they taste so good that i don't care.
Hey Life team... Scones are on sale Plan your day accordingly
I want to send out some love to Mandy Mason this morning. Hang in there Darlin', God is in control. Doc
ug... smartpen just ran out of ink. there goes my idea for innovative notetaking at
I never lie, I merely twist the truth.
i really dont no wat to do i cant sleep
Decided I'm not going to"lol" anymore, instead I'm going to use "ggl" short for giggle, cause that's really what I'm doing when I laugh.
I'm freaking out . I've been stressed all day!
LOL. No. RT Phil Simms hits another play on head by calling Broncos TD play. That's why he's CBS' #1 TV analyst.
So excited to see in Pure Power #backstage ! It's gping to be awesome!!!
Molina should have been called for interference twice on that play. Seriously.
I hate the fact that my best friend isn't in choir anymore </3
After almost 3 months of eating pretty damn good, I need to figure out what's missing from that's making me crave junks so much!!
Good Morning and Happy Wednesday!
oh, you mean puh-honics? thank you for your service to humanity.
I tried calling you again.
So epically disappointed in Snoop Dogg last night, disappointed in myself for not seeing = lesson learned
You did! I jumped and screamed and omg not cool!!
if you could hang out with anyone for an entire day who would it be and why?(:
Sounds lovely. Missing Astoria and it's own little uniqueness.
We can arrange for Donny to come back and remove that feeling for you.
Gave me an idea RT Talking to about head injuries playing football
the whole band segment was stupid...and they weren't even good
My best friend>
A Cladrite Radio listener writes: "Hi from Liverpool, England. Amazing radio! I play your music on all my home vintage radio collection."
Why Oregon high schoolers' do not perform well compared to other states? It's because test prep schools in OR suck. That's why we're here.
Catch me for all your waxing needs this Sat-Mon
I'm sorry! 😥 I don't even remember you texting me!
Set your mind on the things above, not on things that are on this earth. -Colossians 3:2
thanks Dan! and thanks for bringing your students last night.
Marriott Copley square Boston (Simmons)- screening in 45 minutes...www.blacksupermen.com
People think suburbanites don't care about anything. Truth is, they care alright, DEEPLY and PASSIONATELY about absolutely meaningless crap.
I can never keep things to myself
I only Luke the last person.
Thank you so much! You're such a great friend and I'm happy I get to see you and everyday!
hey LJ. Can I get a follow back? Much love.
will pass along another and concert announcement tomorrow morning at 11!
Let me be clear, the WORLD WILL END if we don't raise the debt ceiling! Human beings CANNOT function without the brilliance of government!!!
Lovely day is ending with #HeavyRain and bad #storms. :( Ready to go home and have a hot cup of coffee & snuggle my blankie and read!
There's at least 150 orchestra kids....all playing at once....but not the same song
RT : If you've never eaten at The Stanton Social in the LES, you need to correct that sh*t fast. Fantastic restaurant.
aww I wish we could be there!!! I know you'll be super tan though:)
been there done that Hahahahaha
Sure is!
Didn't even get points! AND ruined my shirt. Made him give me his tho, he was stuck wearing a vest w nothing on underneath.
Stop making excuses and justifying certain actions. If you make a mistake say your sorry, then rectify the situation --Brian Tracy
It's a Venture Bros. reference. one of the show logos has the brothers forming a V in the nose.
I twittered your old lady's Facebook at Myspace last night.
Patrice Bergeron is at the #Bruins morning skate, missed practice yesterday.
follow me back.. hope all is well sir!
Leaving to San Francisco tonight! Unfortunately, with laptop and books and notebook to keep working on assignments, projects and else :/
Inspired by #lasvegas people wanting to make changes after #Greenjelly meeting. Happy to see the community wanting to be greener!
The best way to cheer yourself up is to cheer everybody else up Mark Twain
Ya buddy pretty much got a lifetime pass to victors maybe ill use it alot
We are going to the Saloon after work if you're interested...
i actually killed one of those elevator girls the other day
Kindle 'solar jacket': when is the iPad one arriving ? assume we'll see branded skins of this too before long ... solar summer is here ha !
I didn't get an answer from but I know the truth hurts I've been hurt so much! <3 I still Love him no matter what!
Good morning, B! Miss you. Hope the writing continues well.
We're making an IFLP Quick Reference Guide. Any features you want to see highlighted in this guide?
Happy Birthday, Keith!
Wish I was seeing #HungerGames tonight!
Wicked smart. MT Hesitant to return to #alamw12 during "waiting for the exhibits to open". On the pool deck of the sheraton.
WHAT A GREAT WEEKEND IT WAS! Had fun and saw an old friend from Portland...good times. MONDAY...LET'S GET THIS MESS OVER WITH!
the heat would probably get a new coach then
Yay Colston is still with the #Saints! Now let's get the rest done!
pretty good performance for the rookie, a sign of things to come? Very good FG%
#FF It's his fuckin birthday for shits sake!
Enjoy the holiday! Still wanted some rain from Lee to hit Texas.
Do these analysts have a problem with using "potential" instead of "upside" when assessing every other player?
I was thinking this and am curious for your opinion: what do you think Obama's first concrete step will be? And when?
TONIGHT #Obsessions Brings LIVE!! #X #PoleDancer #Strippers #Ass ALL OVER THE PLACE TONIGHT // 4525 Glenwood Rd Decatur Ga(q
are you at fame?!
sometimes depends on the night
Picked up my first Occu-sunburn of the season
thanks! Spread the word.
I can't wait for one for Android!
Bought a new car yesterday!
It's probably greedy to want a 6-0 road trip, but.... that should've been a 6-0 road trip.
another one of our very talented ladies #booked herself a re-curing role on a #Pilot! we put you in front of people who matter!
Fucking Hell. I thought 'When Mitt Romney Came to Town' was going to be a badass Western; instead it's a Michael Moore doucheflick.
it was nice meeting you yesterday at the citadel! Haven't seen you since Cody's birthday last year lol (:
Very true, no stand outs in the rookie class this year. But hurt or healthy, Rubio would have been runner-up to Kyrie
I REALLY LOVE YOU I CANT BELIEVE THAT YOU FOLLOW ME I KNOW IT WAS A LONG TIME BUT WOW IT REALLY MAKES ME :) I LOVE YOU CODY! <3
that's bad
i just was just in this awkward fake super happy mood...
Haven't pulled his full record yet.
Roll em up!!
no, and I just like cake.
Seattle City Councilmember Mike O'Brien has announced he's moving his accounts to Wallingford branch today at 10 am.
stop watching tv. Go to class! We need your skill set.
Call me. Fuck this "maybe" shit.
people have misunderstanding concerning what school libraries are about
Damn, who's the blonde? lol
we need to win a game
Doing laundry with Skype.
Thank you ! And thanks for being a great host for our off-site meetings.
wishing wishing upon a star i know its crazy but please PLEASE let me see One Direction in person before I die. i know its impossible but pl
Oh, that bar doesn't show up on my iPad/safari.
Happy heart day to you all too! May your heart be full today and all year long!
“: Rush is such an expert on marriage, having had 4 of them.”
Okays , ask me any random questions & I will answer them , TRUTHFULLY . ;)
tummy ache, two nights in a row. no good!
Does this mean that I'll never look good again?
Casually tumbling in the front lawn, where you at
Guess I fuck with ratchet ass niggas 
RT : These Directv cause & effect commercials are fukn hilarious!
So I watched "American Horror Story" for the 1st time tonight and my house just doesn't feel the same lol. I'm about to have a heart attack.
Curious about Ebooks? PPL will shed light on these curious contraptions: Friday [6/24] 12-1:30p in the Rines! Demos & experts on hand!
Why is it that only righty Doc reps insist on wearing their white coats when talking #hcr in the TV studio? Normal Docs don't need the prop
The Artist won best picture. I think because it's the only movie with a dog as a main cast member. Shout out to
itz 40 min all multiple choice but 1 of those questions she has to fix bc I knw its wrong
can't got class
I agree he's divisive! Lot of plans that are different! But I think it's not just him its ALL our government! Congress and him!
What movie is it?
"Break in Two" will make its Rialto Theater debut today! An original tune by Ashleigh Ashton!
How many fed'l judges are bucking the OSCAR system for clerkship apps? Just heard from a little birdie that it's a growing trend ... on GP.
I have to read notes I took at conferences (in the dark ages) before tossing them. Funny thing--not much changes.
We're having a grand old time with in LA! Show tonight with the gang theatre in Santa Monica.
Praying 4 Gene Hackman, hit by bicycling in Florida. Hope surgery is a success & recovery is speedy. Seems & moron has a drivers license.
I remember watching Bo with the Denver Bears when I was a kid in the 60's - he was one of my favorites.
What are your opinions on the use of supplements, such as omega-3 fatty acids, for ADHD/ADD?
Way to represent RT : Last morning off to a great start #growco #upsgrowco with Wexley School for Girls
RT : True but I like to keep the clippings. :)
That is what IRC is for, good sir. #gwj on quakenet awaits.
Mike Posner's cover of Stay Schemin is so good.
Where the fuuuuuuck is and ?!
only is you run out of whiskey...
"They spend your money and tell their friends everything. It's about economics!". I love you, Cameron Crowe
Thanks for the follow, right back to you. Have a great Sunday!
My failure at time management amazes me sometimes...
got a table, see you soon
that's a good girl right there.
Looking forward to the Timbers Kit Launch on 12/9 w/ our partners at Alaska Airlines. Nothing like being original w/ the Kit unveiling.
I like how these niggas just 💦over me haha its cute 😘☺💜
This wind is dangerous.
I Know My Life Isn't On Track But I Pray That The Mother Of My Child Forgives Me, You Are A Wonderful Woman and Mother
poor thing :( I'm sorry missy that's no good at all.
I would hold Texas in a higher regard if I based my opinion solely on your tweets. Sadly, we're taking about Texas.
kicking it with you I hope! Go #nuggets lol
Using the Whole Foods wifi to continue pecking away at neglected email queue while Alex meets with study tutor.
that's coo go ahead
Doesn't look all that to me... :/ the avengers tho!!! :D looks dope!! Lol RT I can't wait to see The Dark Knight Rises. :]
We have the 2008 Catherine et Pierre Breton Cabernet Franc by the glass now!!
State of the art.
Lou pump with a jerkoff layup attempt and a one legged, leaning 3 with no one under
Beating the world's deadliest viral villains
Surfin the net 2day reminded me of my Army days in the field in my jeep blackout drive no nightvision goggles.
Wow, great find!! I'm sure you'll be writing about this one.
lol YEAH!!!!! Is Ging To Be On Jimmy Fallon Tonight!!!!! XDDDDDD <3
DAMN..who's that c;
Doing great and looking forward to the wonderful new year! How are things in Tucscon?
Every athlete deserves a Certified Chiropractic Sports Physician and the best injury care and preventative treatment available.
I was just wearing my awk shirt yesterday too!
THIS! RT : In the mood for a chocolate frappucino from starbucks. ;)
There goes my baaaaabyyy..*smile*
John Travolta sex case: Fourth masseur accuses star of harassment: Hotel employee claims Travolta was banned from spa for "inappropri...
I think people need to be educated to the fact that marijuana is not a drug
RT : Ever try an organic beer? Peak Organic Brewing Company will be at Idle Hands bar tomorrow, Wednesday from 7 to 9pm......
sometimes it is.
This Sunday, I am going to do some Shakespeare with my friend Mathew Brenher! Very excited!
It's Wednesday! Come in and try our Chill-Chocolate Black tea! Just the kind of pick-me-up you'll need to end this week positively!
win against the Bears and a loss to the Pats.
Looking forward to a lovely Easter Brunch! At
turns out I'm pretty good at making sangria
I'm so jealous. Enjoy!
<---- follow this dude! He needs followers!
Goodbye stacks of articles about plainware in S. Arizona.
u aint gotta lie to be down!!!
If I weren't so old, I'd marry you-MUAH!
We're taking over on 7/16, I'll continue my other pursuits too, including my full time job, I just won't sleep much LOL
thank you :)
Enjoy life, love, freedom, and challenge with passion... Embrace your blessings...and grow with the times...stay relevant to purpose!
r u on tour?
Bronx is up there as best pizza spot in #sandiego. knows her pizza! enjoy.
If you breathe on Lebron you might get ejected. Give him credit for taking advantage of it haha.
Blue tips!!
please follow me back
thanks for the follow Casie
J. Lo's green sequin dresses FIERCE on #Americanidol tonight. Fierce! ❤
Penney: Museums don’t hold up a mirror to culture, they’re instruments of culture.
I think you were down to milliseconds between you and and
- Congrats on breaking out of prison! :)
Let's begin by taking a smallish nap or two - Winnie the Pooh..
mixing a little mumford in there always makes it better
did you meet the goal of 3 females?
please wrestle the undertaker next year at wrestlemania!
Im Ready to go to church now
We're hiring for exp CNC Operators for a MKE area client! Mill/Lathe operation set up and programming exp req! Contact us today for info!
I wanna dress up as a homeless person, carry a baby, make up some crazy story and loiter around in the subways to see how much $ i can make
ONLY IF YOU GIVE ME A TIME. I RARELY PROVIDE ONE, SO DON'T JUDGE.
I travel not to go anywhere, but to go. I travel for travel's sake. The great affair is to move. ~ Robert Louis Stevenson
I will not waste your time giving you information you can download from the web, or get from a book you could buy off a shelf
So i think when you go to Yarhoo.com it should be a pirate version of yahoo.com, #whatdoyouthink ?
Bought a new mascara, happy day for me. :) <3
I can't believe it either! :D
4/15 - WA High School Mountain Bike Race. is really making this sport come alive for our high school youth!
your welcome
is this about who I think it's about?(;
They are handing out copies of Society of the Spectacle at #OccupySeattle, which hits a soft spot - I am a situationalist at heart.
9 weeks until Indiana's primary. We are steppin it up across the district to listen to what matters to every Hoosier!
Bruno Mars, I know you don't feel like doing anything today. Tomorrow I have to pay $300 in excise tax, wait at the DMV, and write a paper.
#SMASH-ing news! We’ve been renewed for a Season 2! // I LOVE THIS SHOW.
#fridayreads #LTreadsFinished Neverwhere by on my NOOK last night. Placed hold on DVDs from the library!
World has 1+ billion Indians, yet Hollywood chooses a white guy to play a character named "Khan Noonien Singh." How racist!
gotta get it
Thank god he moved. I swear if he didn't him and Farris would've been still been hitting me -___-
I Want Some Lasanga
yeah, i still prefer the '94 version to the new one. but i'll take the original '72 vinyl over either of those any time of day.
This nigga hunter too funny
nope, I've been so lonely without yall
Chaz has man boobs.
Im low key hungry
Back in town, rested, rejuvinated and ready to coach... watch out!
Anymore photos for the #OneDirectionVideo ? Send Them in asap! (: x
In case you're wondering WHAT that duck sound was coming from the studio.. it's my chair! Daffy was not in-studio this morning.
I just got this odd feeling for country music.
Does anyone have overnight dog boarding in SD they know and trust? Or someone who overnight pet sits in their home?
ME TOO!
Houston, Giants and Broncos to cover spreads. All will lose
Laying in bed, staring at the ceiling, wishing was here.
Now that's what's up! Celtics beatin' the HEAT 106-77!
Sweet! I'm going to wait until I actually go to one of those locations, though. Still only about 30 hours in :\
This montage of Lebron flops is so amazing. Camera doesn't lie!
Thanks! MT #yifollow : Because he manages a federal agency's ScoMed. & he's a NE boy & he's a quick email responder.
So much going on in my head right now:(
This Saturday 1145 Seymour Swan and company New York's top comics rock nyc 917274-7467 or 2126 965233 2 special guests in town this sat
Got to see the lovely, glowing Mrs. and soon to be baby boy E!
But 8more days till prom ;-)
ninja status huh... *brings out throwing knife*
Rather go to bed supperless than rise in debt.
is that what they're calling at it at the Mintz now?
My worries, if kept inside, will stew and then bubble over. Even if I talk to myself, it seems to lessen them somehow...
I do agree that money can't buy happiness, But somehow, it's more comfortable to sit and cry in a Lexus than a bus stop
If I told you "I love you" everyday, for the rest of my life, that still would not begin to cover just how much I really do.
sorry to hear it, enjoy sun & drinks tho! What is jimmyz?
Sounds good!! those are good places to see a game.
I'm starting to doubt that that was really Dahmer... it was a Minnesota area code!
AFC South Champs!
Believe in your smellf.
May 25. Luckily I'm feeling crappy enough I think I have no choice but to relax in the recliner.
I hate the doctor. And the dentist. And anyone else that tries to help me.
Awesome! Please blog about it on edjewcon site :) RT : Presented #edJEWcon ideas to faculty. They clapped! We are on our way!
Any word of WKU looking to get into C-USA if proposed MWC merger falls apart?
of course. 'tis almost time for diving. :-)
! Lady GaGa's South Korea Gig Given Over-18 Certificate!
OK--one round (I swear) of a word game, and then I'll revise my ICMS paper.
Haven't heard your voice in a while. Let's fix that.
"The best is yet to come." ^staff RT "God's invisible work in u prepares u for His visible work through u."
There is only one person who could ever make you happy, and that person is you. David Burns
you did it... Remember
Las Vegas must be the only city where the weekly entertainment guide lists the Top 10 magicians currently performing there.My kind of city!
Yes! Your "mann" is rocking it. bah hahaha RT : are you watching #TheVoice right now?
RT : Off to Phoenix for the Davos of the Desert, #eisummit. Are u going? Let me know about best future concepts for highered there.
ok. But I texted her like 4 times yesterday and she never responded
Anything special going on tomorrow (Sat) night? DJ, dancing? Anything super rare on tap? Coming up from DC!
Thanks for? :)
ooohh I really like the two on the top
yes thanks to you and your mom I am doing great! I owe you both alot!! <3 Hannah
S/O to for always having tha best smile wen i see her
Call 1-800-PRELOS9 or email for any help or additional information!! Let us help you find renters today!! www.prelos.com
t-minus 10 minutes to tickets going on sale! got my card locked and loaded :)
Honestly don't know why I have them. I'll never use them lol
We discovered a bug in the user rating system tonight. It has since been fixed and all user ratings should be restored.
Wendy, I would like to see Toni in playboy.
Hi Dallas Wine Chick - thanks for following Better WIne Guide! Love your blog too - fine work!
Your 13. You smoke, your not a virgin and you wear more makeup than you do clothes. Your mom must be so proud!
proposed hashtag for the conference:
“: the braves have been on fire lately!”<-- yes sir…..looking good
manny is really puzzled by the portable dishwasher.
One word: loud
School probably isn't happening tomorrow.
ugh just use 69696969 then hahahah
The thoughts in my mind are an ENIGMA! (>.<)
Good night everyone... Off to Physical Therapy for my shoulder and then home for dinner with the family
Watching the IU and Ohio State game. This game is so close!!! They keep going back and forth with the ball.
It's finally me and you and you and me and us, and your friend Steve #StoryOfPepperPotts'Life
Extremely Loud and Incredibly Close was amazing!
i don't get why guys with long hair always get it cut SO short.. like i know 23098 guys that have done that..
. by contrast, weather is predicted to be in the high 70s-so we win the weather contest!
Leadership is knowing that your job is to make your team more capable, not just have them execute your wishes
get that band a twitter account if they're going to be playing venues like the black cat!
White collar criminologist William black, on ,great interview relevant to #OWS and #OccupyNashville (video)
Gonna c some big spikes 2night at Wed volleyball!!!
Awesome!! Jags baby. “: Congrats to the cards and #southinyamouth”
I loved 'Dark Shadows.' The music alone was worth it!
Good morning, guess who's back!
No peace until Charlie Brown kicks Lucy's football.
Which means I can accomplish nothing
aw thanks u too! & have fun cherish those prom moments! :)
Get like me
EVERYBODY GO AND VOTE FOR IN THE NEXT BIG THING CONTEST AGAINST 1D!!!!! Austin all the way!! :):):):):):)
"Why you over there looking at me while my girl standing here?"
Damn might leave #NYK he better not hes cold and he's my favorite player on my favorite team the duo JR and Melo!
that's so tru 4 me too
Feeling Blessed, Motivated and Inspired!
ha! I am wearing the SAME skirt today!
I said govt insurance/GUARANTEES - the "too big to fail" nonsense. It IS govt insurance, explicit or implicit. Never goes well.
looking forward to finishing tracks for albulm this week
lmbo & wht you call yo.hair cut ? Dnt say no fade or a all even lmbo
"I figured this turd out 5 minutes ago," - a fetus
Hold on to your seats,it's going to be an interesting weekend.Palestine declaring statehood and the G-7 Meeting.Rosh Hashanah next week too!
But..why am I watching how high..?
I never wanted to grow up , I just wanted to be tall enough to reach the cookiess c': Lmao .
I'm making up scenarios of us again.
Got 80 pages left of Brave New World...due tomorrow. Gonna be a long night.
AWESOME DAY!! First ever Heli' ride w/ cool people,dolphins,lava flowing 50Mph,waterfalls/streams, Valley landing, monk seals VERY GRATEFUL
Anybody watching the NBA All Star game tonight?
Hey Anthony Davis suit & tie is not "optional"! At the Derby kid!
Happy Mom's Day!
Happy National Gift Return Day!!!
: I tried to throw the internet out the window today… Didn't work. It was already out there… In the air.
Huge thanks to Stephen Mak from and from for speaking at #owasp Orlando last night!
Can't remember the last time I didn't tweet for three days. Been very caught up in the emotions of leaving this amazing place/people
mom, i honestly thought i was going to be raped for a second. he had the craziest look in his eyes & at one point, he said "let's get it on"
go girls!
Finally finished the invisible bridge by Julie Orringer. Where are my tissues?
degenerative disc disease! yay!
I'm allowed out starting this weekend.want to have a sleepover friday night since we have the cheer clinic in the morning?
My lifestyle is good
So done with every1.I love how every1 had plans but me. Hope u all had fun thanks for the invite...F- Jersey..
"You know what fame is? Sitting with the women of your dreams and forgetting what her name is."
says not to expect anything this year
Knowing you are making progress is 1 of the biggest psychological factors keeping you motivated & on target-re-member, you are progressing.
Thanks! That mother's protective instinct is something else...
I am a big Neil Young fan! Dan Jablons (Hiram Katz)
. just arrived at GK and 2 DeLoreans are parked outside! Come meet him and have him sign your copy of "Ready Player One". 4pm!
Got my light up shoes on
Greyhound racing is fun. I get tired after a few laps though, the old legs arent the things they was previously...
Awesome!! We actually put your "Anticipated Games" notebook in Explore, so you may be getting a few followers today! ;)
I'm fearing that this is the inevitable letdown after the huge win at Leeds. Need to stay focused.
RT Blogger Relations 8/18, noon @ The Grill at Hotel La Jolla! Attend & get advance reg to 10/11 NBC Studio Tour!
R.I.P. Vidal Sassoon
lol you asses .
Huh? (PS c u at EEOB 2mrw herman) RT : Is a classy geek? The answer is YES RT so? We win?
I hope I'm number 1
ahh I wish! Miss you.
A nearly-unprecedented three encores at the show! Oh yes. We're just that special.
Wanna stop Kony? Send Chuck Norris... He'll find him and "erase" him. But then how would the folks at Invisible Children make a living??
Also from , make sure your story has a wide appeal for the audience and has a wow factor.
Lol ok gotcha. :)
Like I literally laugh out loud watching it by myself. That's when you know something's funny.
Chris paul>>>>>>> What a comeback
lol you should understand that. I am a well behaved individual. Lol
Giants pitcher Madison Bumgarner is from a place nicknamed &#39;Bumtown&#39; almost a century ago
#Team follow back!!
so excited we just received confirmation from Pella - gr8 windows & doors company 4 the Exchange event!
Need Some IQ B 4 I Go To Sleep.M.P.
oreo!!!!! are you on a diet? or are you gonna finish all of those oreos??
Need to hurry up & start planning my Booze for Books shindig. Picking an alcoholic punch recipe is the next step.
Great interview with a legend
Got my 3rd SAG voucher last night! Finally SAG eligible
We're now at the stage where we have a QB I've literally never heard of before.
I might need a crash spot tonight . & hide my phone from myself
Ever find Troy?
aw :( and why is that?
More #ypo interest to meet in SFO for ad:tech on LinkedIn than twitter. Perhaps "Young" Presidents are older in their use of tech?
Hang around Columbia and 18th NW if you want to see some interesting taxi hailing techniques. One I just saw was almost a Nazi salute.
okay :) how are you?!
I've written a fairly good amount of ruby, and yet if I don't write in it for 2 months even the most basic syntax escapes me.
My 12 year old sister has a better phone than me
I can't root for any Bos team so Sixers have my support this series
Our photographer, , is one of the best in the Midwest, we can't wait to see the photos! :-)
Holla if yu need me you allways going to be my boo .
I miss you guys. I ll have u guys over this summer and ill cook.
Good moring and happy Tuesday to all my tweeps!
Shaking my head....Im not that nice.
Anyone fancy giving me a new band to listen to?
Love is the magician that pulls man out of his own hat.
Relationship with God becomes richer in serving others. Find someone needing to be blessed today & pour it on. NspiredBy Proverbs 22: 9
#hugeteachertriumphs You also kept them from killing each other. YAY!!
that makes so much sense....
ill txt it
it's been way too long...
I love you but i would still pick mt best friend over you <3
I see #Belly is trending. Is it on TV? What channel?
GIJ has staff duty tonight. Dinner summarily downgraded to pasta salad.
ITS ALMOST here! March 25th! Get your tickets www.MRCJE.com "ExpreSSion...eMotion is Power..."
Started our famping trip with tomato soup and grilled cheese. #FakeCamping next up, living room tent.
F.O.C.U.S Finally-On-Course-Until-Succeeding
Hey Saturn, suck it. Today is Earth Day.
Are you ready for live #comedy at the #strand near #indy? Good causes!
DEFINITELY! : Federal Center SW wants some cupcake love!
WTF, there's an ad on TV right now selling a Titanic centennial necklace. And yes, it's like the Heart of the Ocean.
congrats on the twins ! Hope all is well!
#backwhenIwaslittle I had a rat tail just like my dad. When they finally cut it my mom put it in a baggie and still has it.
Memorial Day, Indy 500, Oprah's farewell, and more up now in Samples and Drops!
Went to the Doctor today. He grabbed my privates and told me to cough..... I really have to find a new Dentist!
an actual goat?
Just walked by wheeling out the field....never a good sign
Practice til 8 tonight! Show tomorrow come out a support
Hi Dale, Thank you for following, I am looking forward to your tweets!!
wait 4 next weeks show
Back to the game
yes I be so frustrated
": I'm a little tea pot" short and stout here is my handle here is my spout
check out who's on 1st with Abbott and Costello.
My hair got three shades blonder just from the sun here
Catch me if you can though.
Give them nothing but take from them everything
RT : Q1. Once all it took to be successful in biz was to make a quality product. What has changed?
A beautiful day in Las Vegas! Sun and 82!! ROCK!!!
Usually at this time another side of me would come out....
yes but Nathan could be gay
Win some lose some
terrible headache and lots of work and crap before my big trip in two weeks...but I'll live....did you see #H50?
We'll also be live tweeting during #dplawest . Stay tuned!
he's the best villain ever
Through rain, sleet, snow—and bioterror attack
Saw my first of year hummingbird and bat yesterday. It's summer, if they're back.
sounds awesome! I have no idea yet!
RT : World premiere in 3, 2... 1! As in, you're Number 1 in writer's I'd love to work with. Congrats!!
Done packing finally good night all God Bless!
Respiration is composed of two acts - first, inspiration, and then expectoration.
Probably early June 2013
Titans have to take Courtney Upshaw, don't they? Who knows.
I THINK there might be a problem in Syria. I could be wrong though. BTW, glad to see China and Russia aren't running the show.
I didn't know that "oil broker" was a euphemism for "Waffle House Employee"
RT : a video for.... Romance would be dope...... its already done...
Warm and comfy coats at #macys.. tis the season to bundle up! Hope everyone is enjoying their holiday shopping!
with #writtenembattles ? And they still suck. S/O & both came ready to ripshit
I'm sad that I have a meeting and can't be there with you too!
Wishing everyone safe travels this Thanksgiving holiday!
Nice one.
No, no, NOT awesome haha.
"Nearby he for Henry creeps." sounds like a line from a Shakesperian tragedy.
Is Lily your daughter? She's a cutie.
A batch of brownies and #BreakingBad....a pretty good combination for a Friday night!
#CodyAlliUstream I Love you guys! Im 14 about 2 turn 15 on the 26th & Im in the 11th grade. R there any M&GS for the Milwaukee show? 10
shh.. . Some people don't know.
I missed the D-Back fandom somewhere. So...I shouldn't mention that I'm a Brewer fan?? :P
500 followers! I love you all!! (:
I believe she went to Timberline Knoll...
Big thank you to all the vendors, and brides-to-be that came out yesterday!
TWEETle-dee, TWEETle-dum, look out weekend, here we come!
I prefer smart people.
Miller Lite with salt for Grandma Toots. Happy Mother's Day!
Yes! I think you are pretty awsome too!
guitar center! Its a Fender TBucket:)
all the big names from 2005! RT : So much for a quiet trade deadline: Wallace, Camby, Sessions, Fisher, Jefferson, Jackson,
I have a new idea for a calendar re-design; alternating Friday, Saturday and Sunday twice and then ending with Monday, (for the pessimists.)
Is Seattle Public Library director Nancy Pearl the coolest librarian ever? Hell yes, she's got her own action figure!
Tri City Piick & Save Ground Beef taste like meat from a cheap frozen dinner. All their ground meat sucks.
"What is P.Diddy?" - Claire
Exciting RT Congrats to , , , and you are the winners of products!
i aint take my pics yet but somebody suposed to do it for me but ill chek out ya work u got link
I'm in a ridiculously good mood today :D
Charity work? Whenever u feel like u'r not getting what u want out of life, think about the last time u helped someone less fortunate.
im fine with the 1st T...the game was lost with the foul...but you CANNOT get tossed and face possible suspension for game 2
DO TELL!
Nix just faked Kaminsky out of his sneakers. Welcome to the B1G tournament
Faith is taking the first step, even when you don't see the whole staircase ~ Martin Luther King, Jr. |
u'r da best!
I think Mr. Sheen is right....."Winning!" Yep, feeling better already!
#happinessis waking up feeling so darn good thanks to a hard workout yesterday & an amazing nights sleep! #healthyliving I am back to stay!
uncheck local name resolution when creating a new domain name.
S/O to President for finally taking a position on gay marriage!
PB Post wrote that Elton John is Godfather to more than 10 children!
its all starting to make sense
Thanks lady! Hopefully we will be up and running soon, you will have to come down and check it out!
Getting excited for U2 on Tuesday...but who is The Fray? I was really looking forward to seeing Lenny Kravitz :(
Off work and ready to start this 4th of july weekend!
Glad you're liking it. I find I get into this flow where I keep refining my search terms to try and get to a particular tone.
Fingers and toes! Good luck! You'll do great!
i wish you would see all my #imagine tweets.. it would mean alot if u do,their in my favorites:) -anna (6)
customer service supervisor told us today it's not their fault we went paperless just to save a couple of trees!
So sad ": Disappointing news for #Marietta: Theatre in the Square suspended performances today; won't launch 31st season."
Can't wait for #actorfest!
Really Sears? Thanks, I'll check that out. I haven't been to Sears in awhile.
Michael Jackson was Anorexic, Impotent, a Nazi Sympathiser and in Love with Whitney Houston, Says Former Bodyguard
Thank you, likewise.
who he rap like
The ladies in this salon callin kanye west gay....lmao
Wow I truly hope this day doesnt get any better, I dont know what I would do!
I'll take your word for it. RT #FF because if you take a look, it really is in a book!
Again PBO shows who he is and what he's about. Wake up people and smell the roses for he is for the people and not for money. Can't buy him
WHEW! RT : Inbox: "INHOFE REITERATES SUPPORT FOR TRADITIONAL MARRIAGE."
Do it, Jen. Live tweet your meltdown!
so true.
You are better than me already! And I don't know if I couldd ever match master tweeter !
DAILY TIP: Try to have something to do while playing live online (Radio, TV, friends) because playing 20 hands per hour can become tedious.
I'm a model..
they won't! “: Don't care if people mock me, but there's some darn good basketball being played down at these days.9-0”
Here we go - more heat - at least in the east county...sunny & 70s coastal, but 90s to near 100 valleys and muggy in the mountains.
Thanks for the kind words!
Yankees down only 5 runs. We can make a come back.
Quick #FollowFridays before I leave the office! #ff (thanks for the link!)
Stairs are my mortal enemy this morning. No more lunges. Not now, not ever.
Day 2 at #YAL national convention.
tweet of the day. RT : Fireworks amendment is a dud.
nice nice.. Yeahh once I order the couches I want..can start having friends come out
Trees are beautiful
tweeted about Cracker Barrel this morning and now I have a serious craving for some. Damn you!
Elvis hit a homerun..? Lol that never happens
#2nddrivingtip ALWAYS watch out for simis bc the might not see you.
lol at watching Cash Cab for
Thankfully I'm not wearing the penguin suit today..
always bro!
Sometimes at work I want to tell people: "I regret to inform you that I'm about to punch you in the face for being stupid!" I hate stupidity
And a good number will still be dumb as shit! RT : Americans will eventually go to school year around...
That seems like a healthy environment in which to raise future DH leaders.
Everyone Go follow !! shes new to twitter and the most amazing person ever!
aw we wanna try it tomorrow lol
#ThePersonYourTextingWithDoesNotKnowYourLying When they send you something but you just say lol and you know your not really laughing.
Neither does Chris Webber and he's a great analyst.
Monday, Monday, Monday...let's do this.
Who would u rather help w your household or business budget\investment? One knows growth or 2 keep spending? #Romney or #Obama?
Still looking for a job? Come to our Resume and CV workshop tomorrow at 3:30 in Zimmerman Library, B30. See you there!
whats up? How was the show?:)
I've been having such a good day today. Hope everyone else is, too. :)
every walk into your kids room and get an instant headache and then walk out because it's not your problem! Not today my little sunshine.
I miss and Saito bridging the game from starters to closer(s) #brewers (Loe, Dillard, Veras, McClendon... UGH)
sounds like it. What a game to see live! I was just glad it was not Hummel's knee when I saw 'carted off the court'...
Need that sign..lol
This kid is using a shoelace as a belt #2012problems 😒
Yep. Unfortunately, too many bigoted pinheads made it to the polls.
Each type of is blended for differing uses and flavors. Which olive oil is your "go to" choice?
HOUSE OF COATES, Brad Zellar. Intimate, solemn, heroic, gritty spotlight on normally unnoticed landscapes, interiors, & people.
Saw this happen last night! Very scary. Glad he's okay.
I can't believe my dad just asked me what my birthday was because he forgot!! Unbelievable!!!!!
finally out of her torturing class!
": As I grieve the loss of my friend & "lil sis," I don’t feel it appropriate 2 perform @ this time.Continue 2 pray 4 the family."
Whoa! Are you writing a robot-ninja-bear thriller too?
That's great! We still have fond memories of delivering PITG soccer balls you donated to Ethiopia -Ethiopian Orphan Relief
I really wish I had a driver because I detest driving home from downtown Orlando everyday!
Man, why is Judge Judy such a cunt?
FOLLOW she's amazing and followes back! . =)
Thanks guys!! Congrats on the Keith Urban #1!!
--starting fires!
Thank you amazing energy we love you all!
T minus 24 hours till
Good morning! Make sure to check your emails! Our Coaching U Live Newsletter has been sent out!
How did y'all like #TOUGHLOVE #toughloveneworleans tonight?
me too... I've been craving it so bad after having but have stayed away from them so far.
“: like 20 min away at a Hampton” cool cool we gone connect and kick it
lol live in cali we out
He should do an entire show as Al. RT : 1) I can't get enought of Tim's Al Davis impersonation.
just placed an order for The Fault in Our Stars AND Wreck This Journal omfg
Not feeling well....
Interesting findings.....
yep.. did u noe that Harry has 4 nipels
I know walking with my math teacher to class looks wrong but hey I got to do what I have to do.
This is so sad
That song " somebody that I used to know " is my momss SONG . I swearr she be jammmmmin in the car . Lol
Pat Basset just listed ISENet on his opening keynote slides!
RT : Today I choose to be STRONG
Crazy smart with no comma in between, right? Congrats winner of FL Bk Award! She's a crazy smart lady too.
basically over my "man" well one of em. She lied to me and said her and him were not talkin,
Woohoo! Hope it's going well, guys - can't wait to see our shows in action tomorrow night!!
r u having boy trouble????
MB is MB, whether it's in Cairo, Damascus, Gaza, Kabul or Wash, DC. And I guess those riots in Egypt are peaceful, huh?
“: people so easily influenced smh. Crazy.”
You must be at a bar in Madison hey!
Morning network
Has anyone ordered anything from adorama's website? How's their shipping?
I wish would stop adding to their menu... I am going to need another job to support my habit.
We're half way there to 200 followers to start our very first contest. Can you guys help us get there? :)
if you had the power to change your life. . . would you?
Gotti. i'm gonna keep it swingin till the day they come and lock me up! Lol.
Just submitted my first article proposals to a professional journal. *FINGERS CROSSED*
I'm still up grindin.... Told u when u sleep I'm still grindin Money neva Sleeps.......... 5am
sari you would :'(
dance is gonna rock!
Ok so ill shampoo n u detangle 4 me. Thanks. ~ek
My puppy is a ninja.
Can you join us on Monday? DM me for more details.
looking for a job? I can ask and see if there's any
I'm done but i have one next period
i would call him Wolfe O_O
Peter Galison, Professor at Harvard, on the Collective Author and attribution
Haha yeah!! & January 12th at the UCF arena in Orlando...... SKILLET!! I can never get enough of them :P
ALL DJ'S THAT WANNA MAKE THIS MONEY AND MAKE A KILLING OUTSIDE OF CLUBS AND TRAVEL THE WORLD AND BE MARKETED, CONTACT ME. WE WANNA SIT DOWN
Go Ducks!
No dead truck battery today. This is an improvement.
Thinking that immigration reform all starts with closing our southern border. But who has the cojones to do it?
oh ok
what's in the morning?
looking forward to it!
fave plants to grow w/ kids? pumpkins - scratch their names in the rind
Here's hoping Delta's 3 new pain Rx make her >comfortable AND help her sleep. Bc when she can't sleep, I can't sleep.
I've been in Vegas for a year and a half and I've never played #blackjack at Methinks I must do something about that...
i followed!
Thx guys :) (and thx ) RT : That PERFECTLY describes my pal
Going for the most interesting panda in the world, similar to the Dos Equis Man.
Love is an action word!
Just taped a Psa for "my hope for children"
thanks! And can't wait to meet you either!
The nice thing about beards - they always keep growing :D Just be thankful the greys haven't started like me!
That's weird. I usually do not set any privacy settings. Invitation sent! Nice piece in Sophie.
#IWannaGiveAShoutoutTo all my fans and followers!!!! love all you guys!
thanks! Our college daughter is home so it's an especially nice one :)
we're all in this together. Let's change the world.
why isnt there a book full of offices from across the country in which you have to find Dwight Schrute in all of the pictures??
TABLE-Foreign brokers set to sell Japanese stocks
what does that require me to do?
Success is doing ordinary things extraordinarily well. ~ Jim Rohn
me and are the only one tweeting #HU4L come on u guys don't give up!!!
ahh I see :p
I totally agree
I think #Maidrites are gross but I'm gonna give them another shot today for lunch
what time?
Great article on What focuses on: Tools, Tech, Training. 2 speak on this
Its all about Jesus, not religion. ~ We have seen and testify that the Father has sent the Son to be the Savior of the world. ~ 1 Jn 4:14
It's cheaper than a beer ;)
Hahah. Duh. That's my homie.
Nah! Go out for steak instead.
#MyFirstYearAtFAMU I use to ride the V2 just to get some AC!!
The awkward moment when you make a joint call and forget to decide who's going to ask for the customer...so no one says anything...
New Ulm will head to state for the fourth consecutive time. In seven games at the tourney, the Eagles have only won once. Outscored 56-10.
Afternoon treat @ #kidscreen: getting to hear of Idiot Box talking about
You're welcome and have a great one yourself!
Golden Rule of Improv: Always Say Yes. More will happen in your scene if you do.
Only 8 people subscribe to The Ethicist's NY Times RSS feed. Dunno if this surprises me or merely affirms my suspicions about humanity.
thanks this will be our 4th time at were so excited!
DYK? In Massachusetts, it is forbidden to put tomatoes in clam chowder. Not sure how they "forbid" it? More like a guideline? Le Peep Out!
checking in as to our progress on becoming a dealer. Get any turkeys?
Are all music videos about product placement !?!?
aw thank you!
And above all things God chose to sacrifice himself just for us. Now thats love! Show some Jesus love people! Come to Jesus!
you rocked freemont street sat night we had a blast
Yep I am precious
I just realized I tweet with a lot of emoticons. :-/
RT : It's no dream. I'm really in the house! #jackisback Don't bring that fat orange head around my Azul show!
Good morning (: Austream Later on right (; ? <3
right on! Good times
Happy New Years from TripRes! Cheers to a New Year and another chance for us to get it right!
Ha! Commercial just featured a kid peeing in the pool.
no, no. it's april "showers" bring may "flowers." silly, you.
Omg.I wanna work at Bockbluster so bad.I can get free rentals...and then I can get transferred to the 1 in college station for college c:
Feel Like Eatin Chili Cheese Fries
I want to see this movie. Some jurisdictions hv a limit 3 or go back 2 school. We know some 1 who failed x amt of times :)
Im a HUGE fan of urs and was wondering if ir mail you a jersey of urs Would u sign it so I can frame it? PLZ DM w/ ur answer
Rick Pay is our Guest Blogger this week! Read his blog on Creating a Culture of Action.
Bought my 3rd christmas cd for this season!!!
": passed out in my avi >>>>" you probably tried fondling him after you took the picture you freak
Dear Demi Lovato, I ♥ Your Songs And All [ I Cry On Each One I Listen To ] But Do You Mind Giving Me My Diary Back?
it's almost your birthday!!!! I wish I could be heree
Happy Sunday :)
oh yeah when you coming to the chi
"What happens if a car comes?" "We die."
Bemani and Beer sounds like good people.
:) almost done unpacking!Then I'm going for a nice run...because the weather is actually tolerable!
Only another half hour until the #ZocaloJob chat!
Nicceee! Good idea. I'll have to tell my hubby to do that! ;)
Proof that words have power. Magic power.
they changed the start time to 3 this morning.
Well, both. Somewhere nice to go, but delicious too.
Good morning Charlotte north carolina !!!!
I like the 7p rule :)
You gonna think I invented sex [;
Hilarious! and so true!
lost yo # stranger! As Well as everybody else's. Ha
When people RT Paulie it makes me happy, because I love him and he was one of my first followers (:
Dear boss, I'm going to be late. The #royalwedding coverage has taken over my mind and body...
Sims stuff is great at creating community. That allows knowledge to spread. There's power there.
A little chemistry knowledge doesn't hurt either. #whyIsticktocookies&brownies
Learning lots about vPC after an unexpected 5k outage this weekend. Duplicating it in the DC now. Luckily this virtual farm is not prod yet
I just want my parents to be proud of me. K.
The magic of first love is our ignorance that it can ever end. Benjamin Disraeli
woo to the hoo! i can't wait. #hangover3 ;)
You spend the first 2 years of kids life teaching them to walk and talk. Then spend the next 16 years telling them to sit down and shut-up.
getting a political lesson in Spanish.. 😏
Rumor has it that Leyland is in house Section 108 has seeds for ya Jim.
LMFAAAOOOO ! Daddy Blaze doe .
;) thanks, lady!
#producer is the new black
say main.. That barrel has a hole in it. I don't even risk them anymore. We need to show up on Brice and get a space.
I did for Photoshop but the 3D work I'm doing is RAM-intensive :-)
This Geography final is on 221 pages (seven chapters) from a Geography textbook
thanx new friend..u da best!!!!
Pssst! We have a special limited edition topping at our Harvard Sq location! CINNAMON TOAST CRUNCH cereal.
have you figured this out yet??
Good morning twitter peeps!!
tell her I'll be waiting !
If I were given the chance, I'm not sure that I would take it all back, but I would definitely change things.
Illuminating a manuscript (by candlelight)
Yes. PHP is part of our default stack. I'm being integrated into mainstream projects now, so I need to swallow my prejudices
RIP Davy Jones of The Monkees
thanks! just prepare yourself for a new record in March. We can't stress how important it is that you are prepared
Lmao only u wuld put that lol too funny
Hi D! Happy 2012:) Coffee soon?
if love to, I'll pack right now and get a flight to Hawaii
I'm just about to head there myself. RT : At the #LexKy Farmers Market picking up my CSA share!
check out in woodholme!
A) Thank you? and B) I just have to find a cute player, and I'm in. Maybe even (blah) Soccer. But it would take alot.
NIALL!! PLEASE TWEET she's loosing her battle with cancer quickly, she needs to know you love her!!!!!!!!
cant wait til my birthday, its going to be fun i aint seen a birthday sinces 09...been locked up :(
the 12 year old was beaten after a facebook invite for "kick a ginger day" was sent by his classmates. may have been inspired by south park.
I wanna watch it now! Ill make sure to look for it :)
tonight its popping 900 east Located suites ,Meriden,ct.Drink specials $5 shot specials w/ new female bartenders
Getting ready for this year's in Atlanta! Will YOU be there?
Oops. Just hit return instead of tab and accidentally created "echidnapress" as a new blog. What do you think? Is it destiny?
Just recorded a classic swear I did and I ain't sayin it cuz it's mine either.......stay tuned
Leaving from San Pedro or Dana Point? Love Catalina, esp. Two Harbors.
At 20 a man thinks he can save the world. At 40 he's lucky if he can save a small portion of his salary.
Poppycock is so underused. Can that be the title of your next book?
We love all our WV teams!
What time is it? Game time!
Something stupidly offensive. Like every other time. ": Crap. I left twitter for an hour. What did Gingritch say?"
thanks babe you too ! Xoxo
How yo tweets and status updates protected, but your vagina public? DA FUQ
RT : Who's excited about Sonny Rollins? Me!!
just woke up from a 4 hour nap....wait whaaT?
Ouch RT : Cool on her... she got that retweeted pussy
$1.2 mill! Does my heart good to know I helped quintuple the spending of the local Republican hate machine.
Falling asleep in my work clothes..
I love you WebMD you just saved 's life
#f4f# follow for follow :) just ask please??
Eating cereal...out of a tall glass...with a fork...with a 1% and skim mix because there wasn't enough of either, THANKS A LOT WALKER! #huh?
RT/f! Get your family an emergency set-up from FastPreparedness.com as suggested on ready.gov AND BE READY FOR ANY disaster, large or small!
the road says closed...but people still drive down there so they can turn around haha
That was a low blow...
are those yours?
thanks for following me! :-)
Headed to CMA Music Festival at LP Field.
Absolutely cannot drink enough #coffee today. #IsitFridayyet?
": I’m the type of person that tries to fall back asleep in the morning just to finish a dream."
i hate u
SAPB presents Bereolaesque tomorrow...who's going? :-)
Why aren't seattleites more social? Friendly? Strike up conversations with strangers - like EVERYPLACE else in the world.
Old Ways, Neil Young
i dont really give af about the superbowl, i just want the patriots to lose so i can see the look on Detzels face tmrw ;)
In the ruins of this short term memory, impending doom softly haunts me.
Two years would be a long time for a trend. Maybe neon will be big again?
Yeah bro, it's free download, you can also lease it for 19.99$ and use it on Mixtapes, etc.
you can still visualize what's in the book
RT : When's that moderator going to ask about class basketball?
You are hilarious!
lol thank you Brandon that's what I'm trying to figure out!! Hahah
Is a gym rat!
#AskAlexConstancio HEY WERE DO YOU SEND FAN MAIL??? FOLLOW ME???
Great gig at The Tipping Point tonight .. thanks to our old and new friends for hanging out all night!
ha, good point. Just unfortunate timing.
R.I.P Junior Seau. You made NE's defense fun to watch. One of my favorite Pats that I've had the honor of watching.
Hope you survived your flight home. It was great to see you this weekend!! Good times :)
hey coolio one.. Have a Merry Christmas !
"She is a dancer"..oh the ballet "no the pole"
hey so who paid for those shots at hops?
Will some one tell me who's writing nasty blogs bout me?!?!
hmm I thought they comped your ticket if you were a speaker. Lame.
what is your identity de-labeling activity #sschat <- i like the way that sounds!
Follow #TPDL2011 for updates from International Conference on Theory and Practice for Digital Libraries 2011 in Berlin
Ageing Piech maintains iron grip on Volkswagen Ferdinand Piech's recent retreat from the limelight might be seen as a sign the Volkswagen
Really I voted 151 times a while ago and now your following fans who screen shot it?
If you can't query on it, you can't segment on it -- so don't try
Disagree. Edward Sharpe pillages psychedelia's corpse in an npr-friendly way. He's too self-consciously retro to be folk.
I know, the "Old Gun Slinger" #4 is coming back!!
Thank you so much! Had a blast, happened so fast! :) Cheers!
And thank you for reminding me that it's Friday...
hey dudes! how are yous? oh, thank you =) I'll always do this!
she lucky. That's not what's up.
I was about to reply to your tweet but then i thought ' Don't get into another Twitter War' Not today anyway...
That can be arranged
I still love the some devil cd. Always has and always will be my fab.
I'm totes wearing bright red lipstick too
I don't work but, the money I do have is for funiture my daughter bills. I know how 2 fix this problem!
Hoping to have some pics where I'm not crying
A nice Tuesday morning surprise to see I've been followed-back the one and only Double Dizzy. Here's to a great week.
According to this years yearbook my name is Savannah...
I know that wine well. Ok; so, I do the shipping info through your website?
you got told by buster!
Feeling brand new in 2012 ;)....
Um, giant Frosty The Snowman just scared the shit out of me and handed me a candy cane.
Something's are never answered.
I know, love the cheese. Thinking about pre-lunch run, so that we can eat cheese + brat. interested too.
So what exactly is "figgy pudding"? I'll stick with eggnog & brandy, thanks.
I wish they'd show replays of these awful foul calls so I could get even more fired up.
MSDT followers, check us out this evening on Gowalla!
girls be crazy
Like Anders Osborne's "Stoned, Drunk, & Naked," Fear & Loathing is a code to live by. Stories I could tell...
Form habits wearing safety glasses or goggles to protect against eye injuries that can occur during sports, certain work or other activities
Thanks for the follow! We'd love to tell you more about how we blend a lot of your passion (but maybe not neat freak :) )
Announcing some exciting news tomorrow!!
It is SO cold in Knoxville 😞💨🎿
I didn't wanna step in front their swagger! #thewisewordsof Bailee Storms
Family members losing their brain - I mean #cellphone Can one function without ?!? #whattodo?
Ugh. Wrote about two hundred words with code examples for an HN blog post and it vanished when the browser crashed. It hurts me.
At a cinco de mayo cookout...piñata is full of beef jerkey, mini bottles of hard liquor and a few things of candy...hysterical :)
its a lucky day
Crank yankers, can always make me laugh.
And now he just said lebron gonna lock up k.d, lmao wat!!!!!!!
I really need a new avi or twit pic, whatever you call it.
thanks . . . You're welcome
Living next to the baseball diamonds is kinda cool.. but not when I'm trying to sleep in
Also MI 4 was absolutely excellent
Congratulations ! DM us with UR info & we'll send U UR FREE Mango Pineapple Smoothie!
Brewers. 4 games. 4 days. Make those playoff tickets more than a curio.
I think we should have #GayPride day at school this week. Anybody up for it?:)
is just adorable
hopefully you had a great show!
will give it some thought and let you know.
Feeling good about my weekend. 1st sunburn of the year. 2 challenging, awesome runs. Started re-reading 2666. Hope the week stays awesome.
Hot, cold, hot, cold, hot ;)
Sing something from Camp Rock PLEASE !!
cioa bella. Just saw your note. I am great. Miss you
Thanks, Carly. Love to hear specific feedback. Glad you enjoyed!
---.~! G1 CERTIFIED WET TSHIRT CONTEST --- FRIDAY CLUB DRAMA --WANT TO GET IN FOR FREE?? TXT ME I WILL TELL YOU HOW---214 609 3316 --
What a nice spring night
#NowPlaying Justin Moore "Til My Last day"
“ “ Relationship last when you dont take advice from your single friends and random twitter followers!””
awesome to hear about class. Let me know which class ur taking!
Why is it so hard to understand -- vaccine recommendation DOES NOT mean mandate
I especially love listening to an album the day after the concert.
The "Siri is beta" is 100% bull. You don't run TV commercials of Samuel L Jackson using your beta.
now I'm realizing he ain't you
~Hello - so very nice to meet you ~ DJ
ITS MY BIRTHDAY! Can I get a 'Happy Birthday Kimberly' PLEASE!? <3 8
#spraycandress Simply Amazing. And, yes, nothing short of Gaga-worthy.
Nice RT: Tonight In Babylon Remix voted #1 Record on Ferry Corsten's Coutdown
What are your Thanksgiving plans? Do you travel someplace and leave the cooking to someone else or do you have everyone over to your place?
There are way too many Alex's and Zachs at Concordia.
oh i see Rory is in this episode
that's my favorite way to enjoy coffee. Dark and Black!
RT if you #BELIEVE in your fans.<3 26
omg yes!!!
Senator Coburn followed by an ad for OneOK? Seriously?
I Know Who Killed Me
Love seeing the topics on which Klout thinks I'm influential - advertising, Rush Limbaugh, stats, Hollywood, actress. Sure! Works for me.
good luck brian wish i culd come 2 c and hear ya play im a big fan but i will b there in heart and spirit :) peach!
that camera loves you
we are adding new categories every year - categories were chosen based on the impact the awards could have on the industry
The more publicly visible we are, the more likely a public outcry will happen when funding is cut.
ate some now just sit here and be bored
Magor Philadelphia Demo Site is up and operational! Let's get some prospects in here and make some sales!
my Goal is for Google to do a national story about our strategic relationship to dramatically improve Ed in US 920-450-5404
Ive never used shit I learned in high school in real life that shit is pointless
Love my team. Love my city. Love
The Forever My Lady album.
that must be awkward.....
Why do I have a sinking feeling that the Steelers season is pretty much over before it's begun... So many injuries.
DID SOMEBODY SAY ONE DIRECTION ON TV? excuse me...
UCSD lib an acquired taste. By far, the ugliest building in San Diego is Mi Arbolito Condos at 6th/Upas in Hillcrest: Hideous!
O he gt me sleepy nw lol
He read an iconic sentence: Billy Pilgrim has come unstuck in time. Realized, "lack of coherence in my ideas was to be explored."
Tomorrow's show is going to a good one! You definitely don't want to miss it w/ #PrettyProgressive on
Trying to come up with a band name. I suck at this. Someone give me ideas.
. Well done, citing empirical research to correct misconceptions. And there were many.
Today we will be @ Grossmont College from 10 to 2 for the college's 50th anniversary along with 9 other San Diego Food Trucks
isn't that what weekend are for?
your hashtag this week is
stinks to lose it, eh? Oh, well... Onward! ;)
Why thank you rude ass gas station attendant, I wasn't having a shitty enough day until you had to lecture me on the credit reader.
buy cherry a shot of jagermeister for me. i'll pay you when i see you at world dom
Did you wear that shirt every day?
Hall & Oats just said bitch us your blood boiling and are your fake boobs gonna explode?
they are stupid . but a bitch is the same . feels me ? lol
Need to be in the bed right about now...4am will come before you know it!
got two tickets for Allen already. He's amazing live, but I've never seen the Lumineers so we'll try to hit that first.
LOVE Cathiard's wines! Wildman does not distribute in IL, so I didn't get to taste yesterday. Can't wait to try..
A little Signed, Sealed, Delivered to start this nice day..
Some days, coffee is sweet nectar and nourishes my soul. Today is one of those days.
follow before she commits!22
I am really looking forward to seeing Robert Glasper in concert tomorrow!
Back to school Life!!! Enjoyed my time off...
One Minnesota team down, one to go. Good job Bucky.
Omw to school
Blackout Kim.
Mission Valley U-T RT : Hello friends. I'm trying to demonstrate the power and reach of Twitter. Will you please respond and say
mOney oN MY mInd Im sEeinG dollaR siGns so onCe i toUch dOwn kAnt wasTe no time #FULLTIMEGRIND !!!
Poor kid. I'd be fussy too if my entertainment was fucking bible stories. Brainwashed little shit.
Wishing I could teleport to Indy. Three hours in the car seems like torture right now.
WE WANT AN 8-HOUR #CICLAVIA! RT IF YOU WANT IT!!!!
What do you get your mom for mother's day?
Those you thought you could trust you can't. Off to the cottage.
Who's to blame for the earthquake? Come on, folks, let's see some press releases.
--- bills post games in '01..... good times!
Haha! I'm jealous. RT : Thank god for #TT and #FF for reminding me what day of the week it is.
super moon!!!!!
A2: The opinions you hold.
Come see us Saturday at the Rusty Grape Stomp Fest! Enter to win a massage, facial and Obagi Gentle Cleanser. Five lucky people will win!
Oh my heck, there are cats outside fighting and they're really loud! Hush cats! People are trying to sleep! You shouldn't fight anyway.
get next its yo job....I'm sure u can stat awake then....luv u
but seriously. L.E.S. by #ChildishGambino is just amazing. Those strings >>>>
Lol @ linc "the problem with this new generation of girls is they listen to too much beyonce, you can't tell them nothin"
After the pre Derby stories, I still like Bodemeister. But Union Rags looks tough to beat.
Thanks for the shout out , and happy #FF , , and Happy Spring!
I have no fear of the 49's. Bring that to Green bay in Jan. I was there in 95 and will be there again in 2012
Cornelius Tacitus~ There can never be a complete confidence in a power which is excessive.
Van fixed and made it to Baltimore for tonite's show. Now its time to take some frustrations out on stage.
Health and Fitness Calendar
Happy Birthday to playwright, William Shakespeare! Which of Shakespeare's works do you most enjoy?
I hate school. Have I mentioned that I hate school? I'm so stressed out. gah!
i hate bein lied to , ha. you funny.
I love you RT for a rate
People can be so heartless.... </3
your not here !!! I want my cheese cake medina !!
I haven't seen that movie in forever. I'm going to watch it today. Thanks! 
Justin Beiber looks a little lost in the ring.
I LOVE YOUR BROTHER.<3 (;
Blog post by Paul Butler
Hubert Robert's four ruin portraits are immense. I wonder if they were inspired by real scenes. I'd like to think they were.
Happy Monday, hope everyone had a great weekend!
If God is watching us, the least we can do is be entertaining.
Bell Biv Devoe said it best!!
Yaaaaaay!!! My life size poster of Tony Danza came in!!!!!!
Oh look, I already own and love the two UX Primer books you mention… :)
A big thanks to everyone who's given us feedback on the new website - we're working on your suggestions!
Funny! My couch has never felt better
Very Cool! “: yesterday we discussed the potential use of OHMS with the StoryCorps collection at #SCArchive”
no idea, i didnt listen this morning .. what makes ya say that?
#girlwhyyou even trying everyone know your fake
she addicted to bags, im addicted to shoess.
No doubt about it! :) RT : Wow...prayer changes the atmosphere! Thank You!!!!!!!
hi mate .. say do u use skype ?
#NISO is the force (behind many standards) #erl12 Does this mean that they have a dark side? 0_o
Shaq sucks up to Kobe so bad on air. I wonder what he says off of it.
our lead guitarist was just asking about you. I think he's got a crush. We dig it.
If i could only meet since hes in Houston i just wanna hear him say brick squaaaadddd ! #Houston lmao i would say it with him
I love
OMG almost gave me a heart attack about #rachelcrow. And needs an attitude adjustment. What a punk.
CJ should have kept the ball to shoot the freethrows nbs...
Can't wait for Caps Game 5 at Verizon on Saturday night...um....wait a mintue.
Good fight.
I saw you at Secret Headquarters today, but was too cool/respectful/much of a pussy to say "Hello." So, DC guy or Marvel guy?
Lmao my sisters a trip........
you are amazing
When i think about my family, I smile...blessings
alrighty. ill have Naruto waiting >:O
Congrats go to for winning in the WPT Doyle Brunson Five Diamond World Poker Classic! Happy Birthday too!
I love the Kuechly pick as long as Jon Beason stays in the middle. I like him there.
Did you have fun?(:
had a great time working with you guys on #cgxemerge safe travels home today hope new Orleans treated you well!
Attorneys representing #cloud service buyers must ensure subcontractors are required to comply with same contract obligations.
did I miss #restlesscity in DC???
I miss the food in Italy SO much.
I do believe our first indie feature goes into production Summer 2011 in hopes to finish in time for the 2012 festival circuit. Let's hope!
Ha my classmates think I'm crazy
's Christmas song had me totally in stitches! Love
Me love me some Target
That mother fucker!!
Sort of like Bloodsport, but not at all.
need a link?
R.I.P to the great Whitney Houston :(
Why do people find Sarah silverman funny? Did I miss something?
Building understanding, support and acceptance begins with earning trust. ~David Cottrel
Go Marquez GO!
Of course we are!
no Remix straight Rihanna
Ladies. It goes without saying, regardless if you can fit in them, if you're older than 25 you DO NOT wear Abercrombie jeans.
Let's talk food! I'm taking your questions for our food expert today. #AskAnExpert Monday
“: Okay Let's see who wins the rubber match tomorrow. Feeling good about my What about your Dodgers?
Redemption day
Carlsbad School Shooter O'Rourke guilty on all 14 counts (7 attempted murder, 7 assault w/ firearm)
Have fun! RT: En Route to Portland to see what the "cool kids" are up to. Only benefit to travelling w/
Gotta see the lakers lose tonight! sorry to my Cali followers!
Played tampon baseball in the library. Cross that one off my bucket list.
follow back
I love listening to your readings. Have you considered doing the recordings for audiobooks?
-- hate to hear that, our pups should live much longer lives than they do. Hugs to you and the family.
I wear hoodies because I’m cold, Not because I’m going to “knife” you
And a very Happy Thanksgiving to you and yours, as well!
you are #winning ! you pre-planned this didn't you!?! ;) What's next?
networking for a dj host on the mixtape
please follow me !!!!!!
We're supporting you on
Memorial tribute for Eddie Marshall: Sun 9/11, 7:30p @ The Jazzschool in Berkeley, 2087 Addison St. Come share your love and remembrances.
according to Mexican you do
Way too crowded at Typeforce last night. Wanted to tell you I really liked your piece. Also appreciate your helping the bees.
Johnathan Joseph is ranked 73rd on the #NFLTop100 and they get Blaine Gabbert to compliment him? He deserved better on both counts.
my machine learning algorithm is better than googles. Blah, Blah, blah
Skinnys,White V Neck, J's On My Feet Fresh Out The Box..
": Guys who go to happy hour were AMAZING athletes in high school." Don't forget that semester of junior college! Ballin!
Two games in a row where a kickoff return man and ball almost crosses the goal line to run it out but doesn't. Weird.
Why not?
"Electronic literature" is a mere academic faction, now exhausted.
Most people can't handle All You Can Eat BBQ at Oz! Can you? Try for $18.99 per person!
I know. it sucks 
Let's go Lakers
Picked up Carsten Jensens We the Drowned the other day. Fat tasty hardback with a gorgeous dj.
Check out Making Sense of the American Civil War: Film Series featuring "Gettysburg" starring Jeff Daniels @ Green Valley Lib tomorrow @ 12.
Uggghh its top early for work. I didn't sleep enough!
hahaha that's the funniest pic I've ever seen in my life LOL
#ThingsStalkersDo call u from other numbers so you'll pick up
No Wawa review. Not sure why, but their food is awful now. They don't have any of the things I used to go there for.
Unless it's Justin Timberlake. I loved those phone calls. They were the best.
its a stupid system
I feel like I haven't been to work in the longest time
agreed... I see it and hate it everyday.
what the hell are you guys even talking about, ESPN announcers?
The second I heard my coworker's Gwen Stefani ringtone start playing I took out my phone to tweet about how embarrassed/sad I felt for her.
Go eat!!! Support local vendor!RT : Serving Big Nathans NOW -2pm TODAY A-1 Key Shop 4859 Poplar Ave
RT : The fastest growing groups on LinkedIn are students & recent college grads
Speaking of #Harlem, I am looking forward to being in the archives and working on the book this summer at the Schomburg
Wow. just found out Whitney died. Really sad, one of my all time favs. My prayers are with her family and daughter. ~I will always love you
Yep! On Thursday :)
PUB CRAWL IN SIESTA KEY VILLAGE TONIGHT!!!!!!
#SomeoneIWantToMeet .... but everyone already knows that
have you really made a dude scream?
RT : #Pinterest has exploded in the world of social media – from Sept 2011 to Feb 2012 it grew 866%
Not a fan of any day that ends in "y".
one lonely beastie I be...
Did I find you or you find me?
following sarah palin now
RT: : : shoot down the Nighthawks! 3-peat!
SLICE Hint of the Day: When blades retract, click, and hold for several moments, explore which blades hold the longest and shortest.
We're sitting 6th row for the first playoff game in more than a decade. It's going to be AWESOME!
esp with attrition of big donors looking ahead
how the fuck can I stay focused when its blood n my eyes
#ReconciliationLaw - Creates a contract that outlines the specific issues to address and the timeframe to invest.
When it rains it pours
Yes it was before the game. Interestingly, Brandon's Facebook page has also now been removed.
I saw the pics you posted btw but goodnight!!!
German secure.me offers parents more control over children’s Facebook accounts t.co/RtGmyGS1 via
so, I get two free tickets after every 30 hours worked. You and Emily get the first two. :D
This was unlike the story it was written to be. I was riding its back when it used to ride me.
Welcome to the #twitterverse - you have some catching up to do! Start tweeting your every move.
The secret ingredient will be randomly chosen from a hat to make it fair
You are go to jiggle it
HAPPY BIRTHDAY WBTB!
You think the state of California will come after hologram Tupac for that $2 mil in back taxes?
RT : The first and only hurdle is believing in your own ability. What people think of you does not define what you're capable of...
I'll break out the keys for your arrival to the
Oscar nominations this morning and a new Neil LaBute play at the Geffen tonight. Not bad for a Tuesday.
Thanks for the mention!! #my boyfriend bites his cuticles
RT : #Broncos Fans make sure to check-in on Foursquare today to unlock a great offer from
Ofcourse we follow back love
I am hoping 2 go 2 Istanbul, too, but not before August-Sept probably. Enjoy.
Welcome to the club RT : Imma State Champion!!
Fine...I will send a gift and a prayer i dont get more of these. 10 years though and i met them twice?
it was ha ha ha isaiah said he did it haa ha.
Thank you. I don't think journalists as a class are anti-academic, but somehow journalism as its own monster seems to be.
thanks for the RT. lol "Apple doesn't even have to try anymore."
Let me take care of you, i'll handle this
I've got two words for you "mobile+computing." The sum of this often = Facebook or Hulu, but it can = productivity if you try.
lol I'm sure its what they're thinking.
baby YES I DO.
"Great to see my third #piano concerto inspiring future generations of composers!" -#Rachmaninoff if he were still alive on
oh pfft. we're going 5. and delpo's tossing his cookies. this is NOT boding well for the argies.
thanks for the follow! hope to see you in Orange County May 23!
Only can make me this happy. Strolling the Brooklyn Flea w/ him holding 1 hand & my favorite coffee in the other.
We probably wont be getting much work done.. oh wells
Happy Easter Everyone!
what you do is cool!
..yeah, but what if tragedy struck, and they just needed a moment, you know..to liberate?
Where in Boca???? I'm in Ft. Lauderdale. Would love to see you.
Sometimes I feel like we set ourselves up for failure.
He can fuck you good, but I can fuck you betta. ;*
This lil girl is too funny.
This is no joke...www.millionaireminds.org Free youself TODAY!
Had a lot of moments that didn't last forever.
Reading by firelight, or simply gazing at the fire when sitting alone, or in a contemplative mood, is highly injurious to feeble eyes.(1850)
Thank you! It will be 33 soon! But my new guy to follow is
Bridal Show at Lake Natoma Inn Folsom on August 28th dm for FREE tickets!!
Anatomy professor... practice test almost all on muscle contraction... Actual test on neural tissue.
Great album!
OMG i love you plies so much wisdom such a kind hearted person so genuine not many out there like you keep keeping it real
Who slept in this morning? Catching some big z's.
I think one of us is having more fun than the other! :-D
just lunched at el robertos, not to be confused with original robertos. Veggie burrito was adequate.
Dressed for work Ans about to hit the door.. so glad I only work a half day today :)))
It was implied. :)
Bout to draw a mean smiley far on my stomach
#Np - Another Round, love it.
Being sick is a pain but having such wonderful friends and family are what makes it a-ok! #gratitude love you guys!!
omg you finally dropped tht load... I thought you wasn't due till june..
cigarette free and completely losing my mind!!!!! nicotine i hate you!
no need to. You know who you are.
happy birthday!!
the Cube has lentil w/parmesan. all other NYC stores have split pea w/croutons and tomato w/parmesan.
peyton manning will be released on wed! totally saw that coming..
It's garbage! I've tried to sit through it, but it's so bad. RT I love it too! Definitely a hater!
Thanks for the follow. I hope to read Wishfull Thinking soon.
thanks MM
if you want to save 20% first purchase, 10% for LIFE, use repcode MARYJANEEATER at #karmaloop.com and #plndr.com at checkout every time!
Nothing like a pre-dawn calltime to get the juices flowin. Groovy. It's another gr8 day to inspire & b inspired!
No name needed lol
Is that on his Geek?
Holy crap! You're right!
Happy Spring break to TCC kids and staff! We hope you all have some fun in the sun this week!
ENJOY your life!!
thanks for the RT. It makes a day look really small compared against the year.
thanks! right now it's a little scary, but exciting too.
que paso
I think I just threw up in my mouth a little...
Big up Surinan people. Today you all celebrate the end of slavery and the start of your independence. One Love ! Asabi ;-)
Finished tracking the album!
I agree! Having walked downtown the past couple of Saturdays, this problem is really being undersold. It is like a war zone.
Yeah, but I had to pay for mine... and no one has even noticed. lol!
RT: “: I am a librarian. And no, I don't fear the future. So stop trying to scare me by saying books are dead, libraries are dead"
Not feeling it tonight
Mourning my Zags loss with a belly full of seafood, no dessert & Bored to Death
It was hard. We loved Ersala very much. She was my best bud. But....the house is too quiet, so... here we go again!
Ric(FORMA Grp) we got lucky caz VeroniCUN EMAILS agenda 2 Bob Moore. No mention of my Chilo CONtributions or my Uncle on ALIVIANE board
Cheers! RT : Pretty solid first half, #badgers. Toasting to you with some awesome On, Wisconsin!
Hey and how about you TWO take a little off of your existing contracts so we can sign Nov, Lin and JR and
I expect to see pictures on instagram ;)
lol I don't know. I am considering the pretty long hair style with the ends curled.
korean fried chicken -- seoul sassy
We've got the Eric Jacobson Quartet in the house tonight at 7:30. This great, all-ages, no-cover show should not be missed!
Hey I just met you and this is crazy but here's my twitter for follow me maybe? 1
they say life is short, but it's the longest thing we do. so make the most of it while you're hear. live out your dreams.
love the dark hair on u!! :)
follow back? :)
Fiesta at red rock. Lady in line for deserts and she has her plate full of deserts and she asks the guy"do u have sugar free pie? Lol.
good morning ! have a nice day Landon!☺☺
Shorty got a friend and her friend got A friend too haa.lol shyt is FUEGO ft husband or wife remix video coming soon
imma.be.playing.monopoly.
At #kipcamp, is telling us to compose a good tweet to start the day. OK.
yeah, Margo mentioned it in her zumba update. all her classes are cancelled until they figure out the transition
FRIDAY NIGHT @ CLUB ELEGANCE HOSTED BY & KITCHEN OPEN 21 + EVENT YOUR SAFETY IS OUR #1 PRIORITY
My toys love it. They tell me every day..... They are demanding brushable MonsterKolor now.... and I must comply. :)
Everybody has that ONE song that they HAVE to sing when it comes on.
Schadenfreude Pie sounds DELICIOUS.
Behind every great man is a woman rolling her eyes. Jim Carrey
a song about what it feels like living in a "fishbowl" without any privacy. Or one about what gives u your strength.
Getting ready to do the bikini bootcamp (deep breath!)
we disagree!
How can you have any pudding if you don't eat your meat? How do you let folks know where you're going w/out
seriously. Here in the US we don't pay teachers enough too, but its always tough to see starving artists w/ real skill
burned 180 calories doing 30 minutes of "Elliptical Trainer"
doesn't it spellcheck in firefox? and I think my phone checks
Inspired by our 200/400/800 interval workout today to start a conversation around:
I dreamt about spotted cow last night.
nope no iphone, though im planning to get an android phone very shortly :)
Very very cool! Keep it up
Pray For Caitlin . (:
Sending Valentine's wishes to you.
Do you know how I know you're ghey?
my mom just freaking pissed me off.she showed me this joke about usher taking rachel maddow(google her) to the vma's and it was justin. -_-
The music was in your heart all along, Troy. So in a way, it never really left at all...
i will ALWAYS cheer against the miami heat and the lakers
That's an excellent plan! I really want a nap now that I've had soup, but the grocery store calls. Enjoy your snow day!
dear person behind us, stop being an ass. Love, Jess, Libby, and Lauren :)
95 yr old woman asked to remove her adult diaper by TSA officials. Mysterious spot seen on body scan turned out to be wet.
I really do need to get me some LBF gear.
ail's
I will once I get my interview!
“: YOU HATE ON BRITNEY YOU WILL GET SHIT” leave Neil ALONE!! WAAAAH!!!!
is there a difference between all the CSI's?
I said, sit back down where you belong, in the corner of my room with your snapback on ;)
Haven't been on here in forever. Feels good to be back :)
RT : And it's official - Houston-Portland is at HALFTIME before #Bulls-#Celtics game is over!
Schools! Educators & students would love to have the Kindle Fire. With ongoing budget cuts in education - the price is right.
RT : Grateful for my bestie Inspirational, talented, and real. :)
I'll find some somehow
its ok i forgive you
Thank you for the lovely mention!
You called it! Does anyone serious doubt that Plummer is going to win this award?
"Tell me about Crazy Town Banana Pants" haha
who is this ugly ass white bitch?
love that show.
That doesn't make me a white person. That's implying that only white people have those qualities.
yes! Let's hang!
aw thaks so where yhu from x
hahahah what are they doing?
Woww this kid is only 12 and his hairline is worse then mine and lebrons put together. Smh!
thank Danno! Miss you so much!
Welcome back! Really hoping to see you play this season! #EndTheLockout #Please!
Hey Nikki! I hope you have a great weekend! I am downloading new maps for MW3! Hope you take some zombies out! Take care!
"my good friends call me wolf" where was that guy when i was single. LOL:)
MIND YOUR OWN FUCKING BUSINESS!
like I said before only way the Heat lost this year is self inflicted. No team can handle them 4 out of 7
Being happy doesn’t mean that everything is perfect. It means that you’ve decided to look beyond the imperfections
Ur hair cool the way its....why do u want to dye
lol that is amazing.
Hey & guess what ? I'm coming to your live chat :D See ya there!
Simone ese lol RT : Haha I love American Me and Blood in, Blood Out.vocabulary in those movies. Brings out my inner chola lmfao
While Jacking off RT <-- Gonna watch the smashing Ashton Korver #And1 about 500 times tonight
Breaked it down in boat shoes and a cardigan. Couldn't help myself.
Blessed are the forgetful, for they get the better even of their blunders
It's Friday
hahaha I feel that. It is a one sided game lol
When you get to the dealer ask for a Carfax report
haha, said the Devil.
These niggas are not making testing interesting -.-
going shopping. hit the cell if ya need me :)
I got my coffee ready for the morning lol
Behind those hazel eyes theres alot that lies
Today's Insider Branding Secret via Rogers: "....challenges are opportunities, disguised as limitations...."
They are dragging this out on purpose!
Everybody but me seems to be graduating this year.
“ - I know it's none of my business but are you and Bryant back together. ?
Its all in the spray can RT : I can't quite figure out how 's brother gets so tan.
In 1982 #Tylenol took 31 million bottles off the shelves b/c of 1 tainted bottle. What do you do to protect your brand?
sorry for bothering you then...
Happy cinco de mayo! Come join us for a special pint night tonight featuring Victoria!!!
Governor Cuomo: Can't you find it in your Executive powers to save the EI Program initiated by your father in 1993?
totally single. double was all grade school.
Your heart isn't plastic it isn't a toy but if u want it broken give it to a boy.
et calves look nice
I love dancing and singing ^^
Many simple things add up; participate in local govt for the future
I used to give a fxck, Now I give a fxck less!!
Is anyone else having a issue with Facebook loading this morning? I have tried both of my accounts and cant get either one loaded.
you're doing the Europa too?? See u on that stage kid
And then I spilled beer all over the couch.
You are very welcome!
Happy birthday to a fellow guy who batted way out of his league.
Alright guys I need help my new gf is really shy and when we hangout she hardly ever talks....what do I do????????
heh, I was just contemplating making it my personal avatar /cc
Best No Libs quote to date tonight: "This isn't like Fishtown, Chad. This is a community."
IVAN, YOU ARE WISE
Whoa! How'd you get that cool TAP card?
you pregnant?
Yeah but when you induce a ground ball, you kinda expect your D to have your back. RT Greinke got himself in trouble, thanks.
LMAO I love messin w/ Genae.... she be so lost.!
Yep I always enjoy being in his class every time.
Home from the gym some cod with the my boy than bed ! Back to back training and gym tomorrow.
Lisa Gill has notes on her hand. Haha!
I guess Ann Romney with her army of servants and fleet of Cadilacs doesn't need the "dignity of work" like Mitt thinks poor mothers do.
the movie did the best it could to capture most of the detail of the book. So props to the cast.
Saw 23 #indyfringe shows! Ended with Slammed which was pretty incredible. In awe of young talent. So many good shows I couldn't pick a fav.
yeah your right..
I tweeted him on here .
Certainly, travel is more than the seeing of sights; it is a change that goes on, deep and permanent, in the ideas of living.
#fox13gmm Gonna miss u in the AM ! I luv my GMM crew! It's great 2 hv bk & , but I enjoy ur personality 2!
Reminder: Everything you think is important really isn't and you're going to die someday.
Just saw her for 2.2
S/O 2 My Sister Out There In Cali & Arizona Handling Busine$$ Keep Grindin Keep Shinin :) Love Ya!!!
At #DodgerStadium, enjoying the beautiful LA evening, some peanuts, Bark in the Park, and some baseball.
Speak out forcefully in my other incarnation. Lots of good people have been deluded. Get hate mail for my efforts but change a few
I'm trying to lose weight so that's motivating me. I honestly don't wanna end up too far behind you "real" runners.
Thanks for sharing, tough day. Wonderful news about your dad! Wonderful community we all live in.
After while, crocodile!
Pitching some new biz ourselves today. But totally agree on both show and Crew!
being evil with
Pretty sure I did very well in the twitter smack fantasy draft.
Guessing that's a dog reference. :)
hi, you're cute
cool ;) glad I could help
Did Romney say "Borrow money from your parents and start a business?" to the 3/4 of students who are on financial aid? WTH?!?!
I had no idea the baby yoga video would cause so much drama on twitter....goodness gracious! Sorry if it made you cry!
nope you're a queen
better now now im off to bed with my princess
Greetings from Los Angeles. I would like to speak to you regarding naming rights for a new NFL stadium in Los Angeles near F.Valley.
champ burger is freaking fantastic! thanks to and for a potentially life changing experience- at least artery-wise
Gotta love pay day :)
": can't wait to see Bob Marley on stage via Hologram... that needs to happen" Agreed. I am SO at that show!
Bought a whole row (26 seats) in sections 304
Hey Selenators! :) Go follow my friend for a follow back from me :) .
you can see the whole damn state from one place. Been there worst ride of my life. Lol. Be safe.
RT the place to be at:) free mansions for everyone!:D
Happy Easter! Enjoy today with your family and friends! God Bless! xo - Astute Artistry
Every girl has a perfect man. And he calls it in a simple "daughter".
I CRIED TOO!!! and I'm in class lol
Tori Spelling needs to stop getting pregnant and start making So NoTORIous again
Sometimes I really wished other people got my sense of humor. My sense of myself-ha, instead its gratified, lonely, and strangely confidant.
A man's go to do what a man's got to do. A woman must do what he can't. ~ Rhonda Hansome
Happy St. Patrick's Day!
Some girls really have no taste in dresses..
The Magicians by Lev Grossman, which was recommended by EVERYONE
I am a GREAT driver ! ((:
...as with so many pieces of tech you've suggested to me over the years :-)
Dont bite the Hand that Feeds You.
got to support my comic nerds :D
nope lol Im never angry with you :)
RT - I hope this hurricane fucks up New England's Patriots stadium .
way to support:) thanks dude
bet these shows will b outa this world PRINCE 4 EVER
Can't believe you haven't invited those Harvard boys to road trip to the Cave. Yet.
. Presenter then suggested Elsevier could buy/found a university. More likely Google. Google U would break application recor ...
Big day tomorrow!! ;]
wow...surrounded by people stuck in madness!
My income is considered poverty level according to the government.
"Hope is tomorrow's veneer over today's disappointment." Evan Esar, quoted in the New Brunswick Daily Gleaner
Cars are made by factories, and eggs are made by hens. Rain is made by clouds, and kung pao is made by Chens. Order some in tonight at...
Thinking about wearing a Shaun Livingston jersey for #SexyResults. Thoughts?
: that would be nice!! Good luck with everything!
S/O to all of our new followers!!!!!
But not as bad as I feel for the douchers I always see carrying out bouquets of flowers from the grocery store. I hope it's for a grave.
yes I will
She's not guilty for killing her daughter but she is guilty of lying to the officers. Are you fucking kidding me?!?!
Having an awesome time at the AT&T Mobile App Hackathon!! Who is here?
DUKE TODAY MAKES ITS WAY TO THE CHAMPIONSHIP TODAY DUKE ALL THE WAY I GOT MONEY ON IT WELL NOT REALY BUT IF I BET THEN I WOULD........
Doesn't it make you want to watch an Indonesian action movie tonight?
Do you have a following that you'd like to expand? Let ZesMo.com help you with text marketing.
thought you could handle THE PASTRY OF DEATH. I was wrong.
Good news for nerds like me! :-) MT : ... Reading is chic!!
RT if you're excited about #Paradise. ♥
enjoyed every minute of it!!! Wouldn't have it any other way babe!
Everyone needs believe in something. I believe I'll have another beer.
Keep ISO down to avoid noise. Keep your exposure high enough to avoid blurred subject. Keep aperture low to let in extra light.
Thank you so much!!!
I agree 100%. Never let the true ones go!
“: Republicans - n. people who believe only millionaires deserve welfare” ~~So True!
-_- too funny tho she do got a Bertha !!! I'm mad y'all trending #teeass tho ctfu she used to crack on mine payback
Of course, followed :3
Nature walks >
OF COURSE I REMEMBER YOU ARE U KIDDING haha (:
iUsee to think you took my breath away, then I realizedd I was juss suffocatedd by your bullshidd!
a total cluster- i wish it all happened like it was supposed to, but at least its all out now :)
ok that makes me feel better why u bored
haha yeah missing two rims too
Eating at the carrabba's Italian grill in miami!!!
Our conference, is being put together by local entrepreneurs, contact me if you would like to contribute/sponsor :-)
Being locked out of my house in the rain
good night baby , have a nice dreams
Pieces of Mental Gum 2 Chew On...: Is Change Good?
“: just watched the SNL skit...I'm not surprised. Jesus said it would go down like this” dude seriously?
click my follow button please! haha
you need a delivery?
Last game of the regular season going on RIGHT NOW! LET'S GO #BULLS!
make sure u look for the girl with the green shirt on 106 princeton!!
RT : Certainty can be a cruel master over minds. Thought for the day
Wow! And a new logo too. I like the photo on the main page where Paul Edwards looks like a deity.
haha I missed this but happy #beachthursday ;) Man. #TTOT - we were never more productive.
Hearing stories like that is what makes this worth it. Let us know what we can do better!
Nothing says love like poaching lobsters with your never-to-be-fiance.
One Less Lonely Girl Anniversery. :)
Getting ready to head out to a BBQ!
Thank You! >hat tip #gratitudedance<
9th grade: Everyone is friends with everyone. 10th grader: People start to act funny. 11th grade: You realize who's real. 12th grade: Bye.
You are the reason why I am here. (:
Thanks for posting the R-J link. Hope to see you in the 30th.
YOU'RE THE CUTEST THING I'VE EVER SEEN!!
Just discovered www.briterevolution.com. Very cool music site.
RT : The #renown150 ambulance & vintage RNs visited Pleasant Valley Elementary School as part of reading week....
I miss that show Dragon Tales, lol.
At this point this #padres team is just comical
I'm
put your hands through my hair & kiss me like you mean it.
I agree!! RT Rodriguez needs to get plunked next time up.
Mary Payne has joined Reed Smith's Washington, D.C. office's securities regulatory group. Ms. Payne left Sutherland Asbill.
Don't even get me started on Google Reader's "Browse for Stuff" or Chrome's "Personal Stuff."
Totally not cool when the time jumps from 6:14 to 8:14. Just landed in NY
Bean needs some gratitude in her attitude.
Yes!!! It feels so good to be alive!!!!
HELL YES.
Sky chillzle what's the bizzle? Who you got winning it all? Perhaps my beloved Pacers?
Love is all we have, the only way that each can help the other
do you feel safe at rest stops? Have heard parking at motel with largevparking areas is less obvious and pretty safe.
Using library or other computers? BACK THOSE PRECIOUS PAPERS UP! (sorry for the shouting).
RT : #onthisdate In 1943, Jewish residents of the Warsaw Ghetto revolted when the Germans tried to resume deportations to Treblinka.
Tomorrows mission: get a state ID, try to make it to class, and eat panda express
Everyone want love </3
go on zingled.com its fun!
Getting tired of hearing police sirens in my neighborhood.
I was busy :/ but now I'm here :) haha
Dear Universe - When I said I wanted a small stack of large bills, I meant cash, not invoices.
#incollege it's rre you talk to people in class
Come and trust in my words give me your heart back again, kiss my lips, touch my hand, give me a second chance.
We offer hard money (private money) for commercial, construction, rehab, and development loans in 14 states. Eager to lend.
Day 3 of the Boynton Beach rec clinic hosted by Pure Sports Group begins tonight at 6.
Hey plz hit the follow button plz I'll give you a cookie if u do lol IDK well hit that button plz plz :):)
thanks for the follow, Shaun!
I have a paragraph left for my project, then I have to fix my paper, journal, and make my visual T.T
Thompson Library open til 2am for finals Sun-Wed, June 5-8 Good luck everyone on your exams!
When someone who doesnt ever talk about their feelings, Opens up to you. >>>>
ain't shit..i need to get that link for your cd again when you get a sec..computer been on the fritz, but i'm by a better one now
the r going to tour during the summer!!!!
"*Fire alarm* Teacher: okay kids, single file line Student: move bitch, um about to die"
break legs, sir!
Wind gusts up to 50mph on New Year's Day. WIND ADVISORY from 8am to 8pm.
that scares me! Lol
yes:P
GO BEAT THOSE CUBBIES! #Let'sEndThisHuntingTrip
When my dad tells me I can't cook Bacon -.- that's why he's crusty.
Early May! I'm so excited.
Way too many have mentally chosen not to leave. RT Sometimes...I just want to slap the high school out of people.
friend of hers owns The Hub.
Thanks for the follow. Have a blessed night.
Wonder is the beginning of wisdom. Greek proverb
Includes Resolve?! I'd take one.
You have plenty of entertainment lol.
heck of a game Saturday..Lets-go Yank-ees ;)
Thanks! :D
#bachlorette make a bobblehead of me and ask to role play and I'll call the cops.
#JustRemember are THE BEST. i love them all
#3WordsOfAdvice stop being stupid.
tonight's agenda: wash, pack, surf the web, kick it with Aaliyah
I need something different, you know it. Oh oh you know it.
Thank you for adding me to your e-zine!
My dad making fun of all the spectators at the Masters.
haha well if you do it, call me :a hahaha :D
I've turned my back on my bracket...
We are a traditional #Chinese #Restaurant and we will be opening our doors very soon. Our location is
Latest Findings in Breastfeeding Science Presented at Medela's 7th ... - PR Newswire (press release)
Bitch! I'm not rihanna.. "I hate the way you lie"
Im Famous Bish
"We All Have A Really Short Friend" its me.
im an asshole
#design for clients is like a person not wanting to #jerkoff so they come to u for a #handjob... and they always want it their way.
It's bitter sweet
We had so much fun at the TX Clay Fest today - and wait until you see all the AWESOME pieces for the Silent Auction!
Happy Friday Colorado! It is very green outside. The rain did wonders to our grass and trees.
hey, you should check us out. We're a legit band new to Vegas. We moved here from Florida. Let us know what you think! :)
Natural Breast Enlargement Evaluations?! Flughäfen
Haha I know, right?! Where is my storm story when I need some news! And no biscuits either...Forsooth.
awesome story on Thai Basil, Nur! Thanks! Beers again soon?
good stuff...small businesses need to be aware of what/how to help themselves online!
Didn't think I'd survive this crazy work week. But I did. Someone upstairs must be looking out for me.
Waverly is special to me because I am TB positive. I found them while researching TB. ":
I encouraged a WD recently who has no foundation in study. She's starting from scratch after 8 years of practice.
That's better than some!!! Did you do the polling thing?
Alaina- are you always this dizzy?
Mary J. Blige - I Can See In Color - 05:22 AM visit www.RadioTAGr.com/WFUV to TAG this song
Sent out an email to the office, ten mins later get a phone call saying I gotta close it up, HR called one of our higher ups
i tweet hard
I keep forgetting about twitter... Weird since everyone and their mom is using this thing..
Just tapped #Rahr Whiskey Warmer and #Ommegang 3 Philosophers!!!
Competition is getting pretty fierce over here at the #madhatter Throwdown!
you too lady!
Where at?
You're welcome! RT : Thanks! for sponsoring the
do you love me?
Indeed. None of us have a monopoly on knowledge
GD economics and your laws of supply an demand.
Scandal can be TIVOed.
ed: that goal was bc of Semin!
Grigoriy Burtayev - "Every Adam and Eve had own Glory and Happiness, behind their fails, under the Tree.."
#FowlerCanFly damn still has that speed we all love!
Can we ban all kids within 50 yard radius of my table at non-kid restaurants?
“Success is dependent on effort.”~Sophocles
Your mistakes should be your motivation, not your excuses. via
your packing already?
And my day just got better when i came to lacrosse to find out we'll be getting pizza delivered and having a karaoke contest. Yes
Got my MacBook in the mail today!i finally switched 2Mac. Setting it up now.
At the end of two, #Badgers extend their lead to 4-1 over Boston College
just now read ur comment, I don't think we've seen your accordion pleated skirt in a post have we?
I'm performing with Milica Parnosic's "New Blues" tonight!! Very honored to work with such first class musicians...
And what happened to saying please and thank you to people who are working customer service?!
If you don't like JR Smith, you don't like basketball!
Shotgun shuts his cakehole! Let's go!! :)
It's day 3 at event in Chicago. looking fwd to another powerful day of life changing activities.
i been listing to alot of Spanish music :) paulina!!
I need a vacation to recover from my vacation.
Maybe if I listen to AP Biology material all night, I'll subconsciously learn it all For the test tomorrow...hmm
Just another day in my complicated life.....smh!!
At Buffalo State College watching my nephew Norman graduate with his Bachelors degree. Congratulations!
that's a big sombiatch
can yu call me asap
Happy New Year!!!!
Tip of the day: if we start with a false premise and reason ina valid fashion, we'll always wind up with the truth..too bad people are liars
Florense’s team wishes you and your family a Happy Thanksgiving!!!
words/phrases i can't stand: "husbear" ... and "cub" (for grown men in their 40s or older)
#MacBook Apples MacBook Air has fortuitous timing in face of hard drive shortage
TSRT RT Sex and marijuana can help prevent migraines.
Coming soon! The 2012 design! We hope you love it!
Great Tweet!! Thank you for sharing, it sure made my Monday.
I can see the Falcons going all the way this year but I say that every year lol
wtf, that just doesn't feel right. You should be in OKC. #MavCoverage ;~}
Just like Hell.This bus is hot and crowded.
Whoo we "We are sorry for the inconvenience" in a robot tone really shouldn't cut the mustard anymore.
lmao took your gum?
I am. But I'm not proud about it.
I wish I could be outside enjoying this weather. :(
#iusedtothink the salvation army only rung bells & had thrift stores, now I know we have 15+ programs for people w/ any need. pretty cool!
ON THE WAY TO VAULT. I HOPE REMEMBERS PROMISING A SHOT. HAHA
Awesome tribute to Mercedes Ellington at the 52nd street Jazz feat. Great music, danced and spirit. Fun crowd. Antoinettemontague
How did I end up right here with you? After all the things that I've been through.
Throw down the mattock and dance while you can.
if you feel the need to cry and it makes you feel better, then do you cry? <3
On board Carpathia!!!
so im watching a show where a girl wants to make her vagina puffy and fat
Warning!!! Do not open any direct message links from me. I've been hacked :( fixing problem
Happy mothers day from Downtown LA Law.
on the way to class bumpin more about nothing. the guy somehow incorporated the best tv ever in the tape. cant wait for
She crushes on every smart comic. It's sorta creepy. Esp considering they're in SEPARATE ROOMS. Weird.
SO HAPPY TO BE ABLE TO SHARE THIS OPPORTUNITY WITH MY PEPS
Tonight on #ADELEANTE, we explore new programs at La Causa Charter School, including Robotics and Television. On MPTV 10 at 6:30 PM
Even the most misery bastard can crack.
Most work at my office is so pointless no one would even know if I did it or not. I'm just going to say I audited those case files.
Are you going on younow today? D: i really wanna see you(:
i hope
So with mistrial of Roger #Clemens, & looming trial, I'm thinking is this the best use of OUR $? How 'bout Wall St. Execs.?
On my way to Northmeck to take my SAT!!!
The Blast has 15 minutes to get back on top.
yes! We will have two new tanks available when the new line drops
ill do my best
any personal oscar faves for this year, brooke?
to not lose rather than to win
Nothing says "I've given up" quite like sweatpants and a stained XL t-shirt. It's the male muumuu.
Im getting ready right now.. gonna hit the Clarendon for the Rooftop SUNSET.. come out let us play your favorite song for you! 401 w. Cl ...
My Girlfriend Got Hair On Her Nipples...Smh
#ThingsIReallyCantStand being a freshman. Gag.
I'm learning how to tut!
I liked Jeremy Renner more when he was gay.
It's memory lane Monday #DBUalum! Tell us about your favorite Winter Break during your college years!
dude im playing u guys too better be ready
With the over 60 degrees out this week was a great time to clean outside windows. Wow what exhausting work.
#ReasonsNewspapersShouldNotGoOutOfBusiness Cheap Wrapping Paper
Tax free weekend is here for back to school! We have group messaging for all those school clubs, teams & groups.
So excited for a 2nd season of Portlandia #PORTLANDIA #CACAO!!!!
you know you love me and my slide show! Can't wait to do the circle of life with you.
call me on my cell please
Ok so I just bent over laughing re your CraigOs 4 square tip .
I Try To Follow People That Haven’t “Tweeted” In 2-3 Months..It’s Less Pressure On Me…
Wat u UP to
Okay, weird roommate, if you're going to bring a guy over please 1. Tell me 2. Wait until I'm done making dinner and 3. Tell me
“ The party doesn't start until a #Leo arrives.”
Steve () has shared a tweet with you 3 months for $99 two locations plus all group fitness classes are included
If I'm immediately bored by the powerpoint about how to teach, does that reflect upon the lesson?
I hated 3rd rock too. Glad I wasn't the only one. ;)
I eat it 'creamy'...are you cooking then baking it?
Just picked up some great #books at #samuelfrench on #sunsetblvd. Ah I could spend days there!
Celebrating the life of a Princess to Queen Whitney Houston. I celebrate her victories, a mom,her powerful love for one man, and her gift!
Had such a fun night with and ! (:
Duchess is missing ):
Okay, I'm finally mapping out my plan for #SXSW. DM me if you'll be in Austin too!
really? that would be awesome, thanks! I really really need one! haha...
Great seeing you last night! It was a pleasure being your stomache.
i cant believe i didnt think of it earlier honestly.
I love your new single Roman In Moscow. That go in! :) Smooches <3
lthanks for the
quit before it consumes ur life... at least thats what ive heard...
Cant nothing hold me down...I feel like ive died twice over been through hell n slept with a few angels
as long as you can flush the toilets...
I mean took a nap
Watching an episode of The Green Hornet where the bad guys are watching an episode of the '60's Batman show on TV. Awesome.
if the amount of sleep i got is any indication of how this day is going to go i'm screwed.....
oh and on the strings we hung pink underwear and bras
If all you got is NEGATIVE ish to say go ahead & "Slap the Hell" out yourself right now:)
#Bellydancing with starts in 10 minutes! Come out and get #tribal with our awesome instructor, Angela!
So maybe it was McNeese who showed GB the way! My apologies
Thumping in the car to some music lol <3
Today was a good day; I spent my work shift verifying employment paperwork and I had some great Mexican food for dinner.
We are here to lead you to freedom, if we can do it, so can YOU!
u know "Mindless Behavior is taking over" is trending world wide?!!!!!
I am probably more excited by the fact that it's #Oscar nomination day!!! Can't wait to start watching movies like a boss!
Where will #DJ be spinning next?
Books r in! I'd like 2 gift wrap them if that's ok. Who shall I say sent them?
looking forward to repeating next year!
FYI ": Tomorrow's other games (Cal-Texas A&M, Virginia-South Carolina) will be played as scheduled. #CWS"
Anything photo-worthy happening on the ground near you? Tweet it!
a collection goal for school libraries..50% ebooks, 50% print in five years...i can only hope!
your tumblr sounds like mine ;)
will make my fans proud no doubt
This one smells good! Let me know if you need help choosing a perfume or cologne for you.
Dude she's a girl. Girls can be like that. That's why you need to man up and just drop it dude, its done with :/
#CEFACT #li The reorg really makes this work more challenging.
so no Florida teams no team in Phoenix....no team in California, Dallas either?
You're on the right path when inspired young people pause thoughtfully w/ wonder & possibility, then can't contain their idea flow. Love!!
your crazy!
Great commercial for with Fred Karger for President
How can you not love a pup that follows up an adorable yawn with an audible fart? What a loveable monster.
Step #6: give up on complaining.
"it is our knowledge of place that sets community foundations apart" by CEO Lucas of
Thank you for the retweet!
The #Brewers scored 7 runs on 7 hits in that inning after scoring only 2 runs on 4 hits in last night's game.
I hate it when i meow at cats and they dont meow back. Unbelievably rude.
oh snap...it's #cincodemayo Saturday and I'm legal.
oh dang. My godmother and I have that in common. :-/
It's even better in person! Thanks for the reply.
Karen Handel Quote: “Just like a pro-abortion group to turn a cancer orgs decision into a political bomb to throw. Cry me a freaking river.”
. Did someone say something about dead people? Campbell? Cosgrove? Are you trying to trick me?
I think I am addicted to the song #Memories by David Guetta
Another Beautiful Day Hope yours was a rewarding adventure!
Don't Want To Move.
she is your alpha your delta ...your soror line sister .. you wish she lived closer.. she's your front and you miss her
Hi! Just getting back on twitter. Been running like crazy! Finishing my album. Teaching a ton. Traveling between two cities is no joke!
aww thanks:) so are you!!!
why u look like u got a mohawk in ur picture? lol
You have to start before you can succeed at anything.
Many thanks! That was fun to unravel.
#DanHeath #GrowCo 'The emotional system is the fuel for change'
I believe that how you feel is very important to how you look - that healthy equals beautiful
Starting tomorrow, our 2 new flavors? WILD STRAWBERRY (no sugar added) and PEANUT BUTTER. There are delicious possibilities here, people.
thanks for the follow!:)
Listening to BandBaajaBaraat, feel like dancing in subway :d
The most American thing I've ever seen is Wipeout playing in a McDonalds lobby #merica,fuckyeah
I'd hate to be at your house right now, I can't stop coughing.
Teresa magnum discussed Iowa's new push for digital public humanities.
I want twitter friends all over the world, you're my first friend in South Africa! :D
Congrats to the winner of the Hong Kong trip
The kids are still alright!
My sister makes so many noises in her sleep idk what to do lol
what are the odds of pre-orders for the opening day scarves to then be picked up on game day?
I think you could set Robin and I down in nearly any city and we'd find the dive bar.
haha. With a beard like that, it's no surprise he wins the wikipedia disambiguation battle. My own rivals: mostly sportsmen
I don't want to talk about it
Some people never stop serving #alanperez here from the Dominican, serving on a Saturday
One day I want to bone a guy named #Jesus so I can scream his dads name out during sex....
"I'm against being against anything" - Anonymous
Earthquake freaked me out! At first I thought there was a big truck going by until the house really started to shake!!!
First mention of the desirability of a partnership with ARTstor... now that would be cool.
To whom shall I re-gift this unwieldy Matisse calendar?
damn straight!
Lolin at this spanish packet! ap test is going to be buenoooo
Two of my followers just need to admit they like each other and stop being immature about it.
Samantha, you're 3 rows in front of us:-). I saw you pimping in the back row Andy. Thought you couldn't drink beer?
The 2-day Easter holiday is over and the stores have reopened in Munich. No longer have to rely on gas stations for staple items
which means you did something bad... what did you do Phil? Did you paint the dog with blue pain again???
If you say jump, I'll say how high! ;) Great meeting you & Saturday. BTW, my 2 oldest kids are same age as yours!
follow,me
So looks like my ipod is dead. :/ No covers anytime soon Dx
Any plans for showing in Albuquerque?
If you're in NY this weekend, stay warm! If you came out to San Diego for Pacific Symposium, we'll see you there!
Tonight it's about enjoying a 2006 Saggi!
Fireworks :P
He is with the shit.
I think imma need to shed a few lbs when I get home. And I ain't talkin bout weight.
Happy mexi day guys ! Drink up that jose cuervo🍸🍻
From the #pinebeetle to the #carp and now the #snakefish, Stop introducing these things into our natural habitat!! #reallyfuckingthingsup!!!
YEs, actually !:) and thank you !
“: just said she wear Jordan Heels.”|lairr
Since I have yet to hear back from and its been 4 weeks, endless calls and emails.. can yall suggest a similar site?
"What's your nationality?"
That's wonderful, many congratulations!
I wish you have the best birthday ever
I see you over there so hypnotic.. Thinkin bout what I'd do to that boday, I'll get you like oh baby baby oh baby baby (;
Nursery school "Show & Tell" Day should be renamed "How Good Is Your Mother's Memory?" Day.
Giving this another shot. Watching "Abduction." And once again, it's for the #HowDidThisGetMade podcast.
A little blasting in the AM to start off what looks like a great week ahead. Ready to crush it!
Hans My Hedgehog ❤
My life depends on Google, quotes, and my horoscope...
#What's your Beatles #1? Something- Do You Want to Know a Secret- I'm Happy Just To Dance With You- Here Comes The Sun- All My Loving- (1)
Looking for a new apartment in Astoria for June 1st. We've had enough of the mildew, and don't want to be here while its being t... (FB)
We told you all that Urban Flight Apparel is a different, bold, & unique brand. WE ARE NOT AFRAID to encourage you..so go for it!
It is a great day to start planning and setting goals for something you want to accomplish in your life. Ask for help if you need it!
I know. I thought that was pretty rude. I'm not full Mexican like I don't have straight hair lol
thanks lady! I appreciate your kind words!
I tweet alot!
i just tentatively planned my next month...they say life is what we make it, and mine is a whirlwind of adventure right now!
The desire for a richer, fuller more abundant life is praisworthy.
But first: family renditions of, like, 5 different songs at once. At the moment: Oklahoma!, Run DMC, Ace of Base, West Side Story, Squeeze.
Wonderful, thank you! I will be in touch shortly through my SI address.
SD Home Garden Feb issue restaurant dish: Snooze; Salt Box; Cinepolis; Inn at Park; The Field; Stone World Bistro & Wine Pub
you can only correctly see when letters are 3x bigger than normal, rigid gas perm contacts often can restore full vision
Seriously, not one follower from #Boston? Don't New Englanders like Thai food? Let's step it up Boston!
Insanity so far!
NO SCHOOL 4 YOU......! I'm here all day and ready for you anytime.
Loving #TheVoice!! Team
tweet me for my birthday? Please? :)
Not as nice as a Millipede
A dog may be man's best friend, but the horse wrote history.
Nope. But I like my seat. He probably likes his. And it's a small classroom, so I just go with it.
he will get over his women problems soon. I knew he was having women problems so I put him on my team to win
Did you buy one of our owl shirts? Take a picture of you wearing it and post it on our wall!
haha , balls stuck to the legs?? :)
what's happening my friend. Have not seen you since Chicago! BTW GREAT job service! You & are great!
no ones is lol except Mexicans and rabbits
watching a couple eps of Breaking Bad after a weekend-long music-learning retreat in the woods
DISCO INFERNO
My meniscus keeps bothering me! Trying to avoid surgery!
Just booked a hotel for our scout trip coming up in May. One step closer to the big day!
sorry im a whore
BBC - Science and Islam, Part-B, The Empire of Reason
' That sounds absolutely delicious.
Unless Obama promises me a moon colony I don't think I can forgive him for not picking sparty out of the west.
Anyone got a $-saving wedding tip to share? Or a cheap solution to what could have been a big wedding snafu? Please share.
I wish u wished better
Educate yourself! Everything you need to know about #cnndialogues' panel of experts: goo.gl/27JkE
Of course it is. It is the subjugation of one class over another.
Really Obama, I like you and all, but couldn't you have picked a better time to have your speech - it's Teen Week on Jeopardy!
You did great job in the show today! The crowd loved it when u appeared in the show!
I've been at #mw2011 for less than an hour and already ran into someone I know and made lunch plans. I love this conference.
Those people who aren't funny but try to be funny constantly.
umm im sure u have nothing to worry about...lol
Just drag the .jar files into the "plugins" folder
i want to know why is so sexy and how come he's not following me?
#BigTimeRush is coming to Nashville this weekend. Woot-woot!
No rose no problem
This lady is really eating dirt like its candy (-__-)
Guess exploring the India Mkt. maybe its vac since they were in the area OR looking to outsource their IT lol.
Cy not cry. Damn auto correct.
😄 LOL!!! Guess so...not a normal convo you hear at a RE networking event...just sayin!
making your poster (;
when you try your best and surpass pain,but You feel like you are not getting anywhere
is it possible for something to be "somewhat ridiculous"?
Did you really just make Machiavelli and da Vinci protagonists/action heroes of a novel? Really? You did that.
Well ok.Huey Richardson was a mistake and Limas couldnt catch a pass,nice speed though ..I stand corrected.Ok can I say not many
love your logo! Thanks for the follow...
"never" being when she will check her twiiter account, unless i tell her to, which will be at noon today.
#zap tweets me.
oh god I find that SO HUMOROUS
good point, it's actually Monday morning here in Queensland, a great day for the beach :)
He just took an extra spring training month. Here comes the May Heath Bell
Presenting video of the presentation of Birke Barge from TedxNextGeneration Asheville
Healthcare Reform or Not! If you don't understand the TRUTH about healthcare Expect more of the same Get your book www.theprofittrap.com
Nice, how'd it go?
Excited to play with the app at !
climbing wall tomorrow...blue v1, perhaps tomorrow will be our day.
Is this bar in Pittsburgh?
I still gotta keep my eye on you.
I wouldn't worry too much since it is a matter of context; what and why we are tweeting, and to whom we are tweeting :-)
is my new favorite.... hahahh
RT : The early bird gets the first cup of coffee. (Cc: ) / I got a whole pot!
Passive agressiveness is like an SBD fart.
Place departing address(home) in box A Place arrival address(BHS) in box B Click get directions
Once im over something, then comes the I dont care anymore, then its focus up time!...#aHuniT!
Congrats on getting 10 mil on UnFriend You!
I'm sure this has been said before, Stan Van Gundy and Ron Jeremy........
i hope wins at the teen choice awards!!!
we'll be at #NEMA12 too, stop by the Esri booth.
Better knock on wood. RT : It still looks like the US will have sub-8% unemployment on Election Day.
Thank you for the RT. It's a great way to visualize the concept
I'm just an Ordinary Girl *hint
Need a family fun night? Pick up your NM Museum of Natural History and Science Spike coloring sheet at any ABQ KKD for a chance to win!
Talk to about & mayor just signing Excutive Order re: transparency though data releases
We have cool "Followers"!
lmaoo what day is it?
Do you think my landlord will be amused if I write APRIL FOOLS on my rent check instead of a dollar amount?
Please check your email - I sent you a time-sensitive message. Thank you.
Just heard Tom Waits singing, "Maybe things will be better in Chicago." Maybe, but only from about June-October. Otherwise no such luck.
does Americanized have 2B involve with the belief of GOD. America was founded on the value of its fore father n god?
thanks Diana
Read tales to my grandkid J. I love tales, I live in a tale. I am a queen he is a little prince.
Sat night and watching Moulin Rouge in High Def with my step bro.
Chocolate contact flavonoids, which act as antioxidants. Antioxidants protect the body from aging caused by free radicals. Enjoy!
What do you think about Klout's new brand squads? Not really sure it will affect this
:3 you too!
“: #poundthealarm” love this song!
Just had some delish Easter pho at ! I'm going back this week for a beer tower.
See you later for your panel at #AHAA2012 ~ Will be amazing!
Glad all is going well!!
what a loser
It is almost cake time .. yummy :)
I like flying. With Great training and producing session today.
LETS GO RANGERS!!! WOO!!
It is wise to model the behavior you expect from others!
Ha!RT Someone's phone keeps going off &ring tone is "Highway to the Danger Zone" it makes me want to go home and watch Top Gun
: yeah I realized it said kayash but it's not me. Oh and that
haha i can only hope! (;
:( but I've missed you!!
wisdom teeth pulled this morning. I am out of it. :/
congrats you've won a $100 gift certificate to !
Keeping most if your thoughts in your head really gives you an altered perception of life.
whoa, buddy! way to go! how was it? is that your big one? just 12 today for me, my 18 is next week. keep pushing me!
Smoking Gun ~ johnny walker red blended scotch whiskey cherry heering / sweet vermouth fresh orange juice
Sounds great, except the part where they cut care to illegals and payments to hospitals to achieve this "success."
Fashions have done more harm than revolutions
I know my baby 💔
yep. We all got student tickets. Currently @ Pickels watching her down a quesadilla. I'm holding out 4 stuggys
Thanks for the RT
Yes! Follow to see all the new reggae we release this year! ROOTS
Our good friend Peter Parts on phone! Reminding everyone to get tickets for benefit #wineauction & dinner coming up!
Thanks ! That means a lot! You're a talented lad.
wanna come to my bike funeral sat or sun?
The person that's at my house <<<
Jacques Revel on the "The Public Uses of History". Tension between History, axiomatic expectations, and memory.
going to sleep to wake up in an hour. shiaaaaat.
Can't drink all day unless you start in the morning.
ill probs end up beating my head off the wall all night
Yes indeed. I saw it in 3D at a 4K cinema. Story, dialog, effects, sound. Everything was there. (And two bonus scenes! :)
Merry Christmas
Starting now!! #sociologist 's talk "Social Communication in the Twitter Age" in Brown Lab
aways remember that, no matter how useless you feel, you're someones reason to smile
Trending things not just for our role model but for her mamma too! #ItsAnArianatorThing ♥
Melville House Press sells those...
Are you talking about Freddy?
Since the Zorich survey of DH centers published by CLIR in 2008, has anyone assembled a more up-to-date list of DH centers (US & abroad)?
nice how long are you here and does your phone work now?
Don't call me "Retardo"... !
#CheerUpJustin I'm sure you will hit #Puberty soon....
girl it feels like forever since we have talked :(
So that's why traffic is so screwed up. Had no clew VP Biden was down the road from my house? What the heck is he doing here!?
crying like a little baby watching this carl beane tribute on nesn. :(
Tomorrow is Bulldog Spirit Friday! Wear your favorite ACC Club, Sports, or organization t-shirt with school bottoms and shoes
I heard you say the word TILT a number of times during the show. Was that an ode to ?
Bought my mommy her gift (: , its so hard to hide it though !
Lebron consulted Jim Harbaugh on his decision.
Cake cake cake. He wanna lick the icing off lol RT : “ Ah man this is love making weather #RiRiMoment” O_o
haha I wish this town wasn't so boring so that ppl would stop butting into other ppls business lol
its hard to buy xmas gifts for people who have an attitude problem.
just realized it was friday. :o
FINALLY LIAM! <3 hahaha liam and silver ;)
but there won't be any other party if you are leaving.
it's a great window to the subliminal mind
Can you guys follow me please!! :(
RT ur P's & Q's" comes from England as bartenders tell rowdy guests 2 "mind their own Pints & Quarts" & settle down!
Bar? That's much better, I assume.
turning into a casual semester-long baby-author trope, but this was a total end-of-the-semester surprise
RT : I am in need of a few well-adjusted students for a volunteer thang this Saturday AM at Interested? DM me or...
I can't take the stress! #Caps RT Rangers tied it w/ PPG with 6.6 seconds left. Ward still in box, double minor. Heading to OT.
Can't wait!! “: Just watched first cuts of our studio videos! Trying to finish them soon so we can share them with you all!!!”
Spending the weekend for #thatcampsf 2011!
hope your recovery is progressing apace!
Not to eaves drop but...CINCINNATI is SO excited! Loved The Way!
I know what I want and will not settle for anything less than I deserve.
blake is doing better, just really sore.i read your email just havent had time to respond, i promise i will tho :)
I like having a front camera on my phone :)
>>>MLM News! Paparazzi Accessories( New Company Listing )
Chicago probably had more chops.
Went out and picked up Joss Stone's discography to see she's worth robbing and killing... I just remembered my childhood and missed my mom.
A crash course in Corinthian. Columns: extra fancy. Leather: fake. Letters to by Paul: preachy but interesting.
Does it really surprise you? ;)
apparently a movie shoot is going on downtown todayy
can your iPad tweet from the roof?
I beg to differ. I thought 's All Caps personal request to check her profile was pretty heartfelt and personal.
i bet it would...that's wehre it all started hahaha
you're a #tweetcreep... You follow but you don't tweet... C'mon now
let me know what you think!
Come to Indy now we miss u
RT metal junkies“: Back at the studio today- Clown is filming segments! Should be interesting to say the least. Stay tuned.”
You got that right! :)
Jaguar F-Type is poised to pounce in 2013
if i broke my laptop i am screwed!!!
I just outplayed my junior year. My GOD please throw something serious at me. I'm looking for even a fraction of a challenge.
Randolph vs. Reggie Evans is a heavyweight fight. Those dudes are wrecking balls.
Thanks for the follow Matt. Hope you're doing well.
My ~zen~ morning came to a halt once the contractors started banging on my roof. Thank God I'm not hungover.
Yes! 110% in. You? Hope so!! Would be so fun to have you there!
The team has landed in
What is this? LOL
I want to disappear into my bed for about a week right now.
I just noticed that. Not cool.
advice- do bicep curls before you take the ice to keep arm bands up.
Wow just finished listening to jayz version of bump bump bump wthhh!! Lol.
Im believing God for the full healing and deliverance of one our deacons at New Era! Please agree with me for His full recovery!
thank u
you've seen it? Shit is crazy. Don't even care if its real or not. I am afraid.
Reading some nursery rhymes to my kid. Pretty sure "Old Mother Hubbard" is really an allegory about Scientology.
Love that at our party every time we hear "Hugo" it's followed by "son of a--"
Loving it as every.... Raving in San Diego!
Why thank you!! :) It's a whole new world! :p
Already ordered here. I hear he's slamming away on the finishing touches.
as a 4 1/2 year student of airbrush, I have only used one. IWATA,.. now I have 16. It will never end will it? Iol...
he has always been on bron's nuts. Loves the Heat. Worst NBA reporter.
Met a drag "icon" tonight #brrrpt!
The hell you will!
I Love You So Much...(:
Still need another panelist for presentation on Asian mass media/popular culture. Can send you panel descript
U C Davis students chanted :"You use weapons! We use our voice!
Oh how come?
Is Bron Bron rocking the drunk tweet???
Thought Milwaukee was? MT : Context on Joey Votto deal: Cincy is the smallest local tv market in United States among #MLB cities
Today’s episode was amazing! We love Ellen and can’t wait to start on Lisa’s home.
Big shout out to our FireBird Varsity Baseball team! #DistrictChamps !
what do you mean by 12?
To qualify to win a "SML Optimization Package" you simply Like the page, join the "Free Optimization Contest" and share! It's that easy!
here is some family to follow...RT
One of those nights...
My poor little feet
Do you have a favorite area car wash?
iStreamPlanet Drives Video Delivery in the Cloud with Intel® Xeon ...
I am so glad I decided to revisit big audio dynamite today...
Not sure how you track pt. data but perhaps identify some procedures indicative of prev care approach & query database?
Living in Salem during Halloween is like living at the North Pole during Christmas. So, yes, it is the plot of Nightmare Before Christmas.
Excited to be at the women's session of the Texas Evangelism Conference! Donna Gaines is about to speak so pray!!!
Guys, it has been an absolute pleasure working with you all this season. Thank you for everything.
The LORD is good to those who wait for Him, to the person who seeks Him. - Lamentations 3:25
lol I was just about to txt u too . U saw the pic of Kobe crying ???
RT if you use the women's bathroom when ever possible.
to be Detroit for 30 mins - Completely burned out? lol
I do! Big ups!
Lots of great groups & NGO's at #Tcamp12 generating amazing data & content. Add that content to #Wikipedia to maximize its reach & impact
:) I agree
did you watch the Portugal U20 game last night? Also is Nelson Oliveira part of the Benfica squad this year??
talked to the girl whose heart stopped, literally, after she scored a goal to win her field hockey game. On at 11
I mean...that's what it looks like to me, but his guitar case is kind of concealing it.
I don't always talk to Kentucky alumni, but when I do, I always ask for large fries... ;)
Don't be afraid to ask for what you want when working w vendors. Use your use data to define your needs.
Happy to have everything set to attend the 79th Annual Meeting of the Music Library Association, being held in San Diego
what was you're dream
Birthday hangover, which I feel is only gunna get worse as the day goes on.
Into vegetarian? Is filet mignon your favorite? Or does seafood float your gondola? We have it all at The Milano Inn.
There is actually a restaurant by where I live called that - it inspired someone to create a restaurant from that song.
Go to get some breakfast
see there
Hope you get well soon we all love you!! :) -beliebers
I live right by Santana HS houses behind Albertson's.
lol yeh but not all guys are like that but we do need patience shit at least i do
YOUR MARRIED
Watching scary movies with is too funny. Lmao
RT All players who were on waivers yesterday have cleared.
Stealing and copying the keys to my high school. I wanted to be a janitor I guess.
you've got to keep your own dreams highh, you've got to know that the sky belongs to no one
we're gonna party all night, have the time of our lives lolool
Tomorrow I'm going to work on those mad procratination skills of mine. Or maybe Tuesday.
#HungerGames was amazing im in #Love can wait for the next movie
Brittany got me the entire series for Christmas. To say it was the greatest gift ever would be an understatement.
Hurry up and catch up! The end should be epic!
I got one 2 weeks ago. Meg is waiting for one to show up again, so let me know if they come back!
@ you're right Henry has really shown up tonight
Laura Veirs - Sun Is King - 11:15 AM visit www.RadioTAGr.com/WFUV to TAG this song
Bye bitches!
We also have our famous pot roast on our buffet today! Plenty of options! We're open until 2 for lunch and from 5:30-9:00 for dinner.
I think people that don't know how to use a code repository shouldn't be around an AWS ;)
Any good middle school history sites/activities out there?
you will get through this...be strong! hahaha!
Tonight's specialty is Jack's recipe for Downhome Punch. Bar is open, come on over.
I really want some jack in the box. Minus the horrible service.
You know what's a nice, calming thing to see before you turn off the light? A mosquito hawk flying around your bedroom.
#ThingsThatBLACKPeopleDo get tired of these racist ass trending topics.enough is enough.we should love each other equally.not descriminate.
We got news for ya El Paso! With sufficient thrust, pigs fly just fine!
KIlled the stage last night at the UROCK tour
I f#cking love to ACT! I love to be in it, watch it, do it, see it, feel it, embrace it.
whenever bro I'm down for whenever
Good morning
after the fact? No thanks!
F the DMV seriously.
I sleep with my phone just incase #oomf needs me. <3
Has it really been a week since #delany?
Not yet. Where can I take a look?
On a mission to get my grades up
I wish I could favorite people's profiles haha
Men who don't like girls with brains don't like girls. ~ Mignon McLaughlin
Just left wal-mart.
Hear the sound of my breaking heart...
TRIPLE H, JUSTIN BIEBER on MAY WEATHER corner yea
Re-dyeing highlights and getting extensions :')
Strong women wear what they want! Wear it like you mean it and feel like a million bucks! Find your perfect fashion statement
yes ah!
i loved when u were ub the fbi in wwe
holy shit, have you never heard of the Weather Channel before? Or the web?
S/O 2 the friends at SKAR. Gr8 2 see u at the
nice goals in your description. thanks for the follow.
Yikes! Clearly, they need your help.
when has he been anything but a guy with huge upside? Constant disappointment and has NEVER consistently produced competitively
RT : Any available free agents you think the #Chargers should go after?
no problem hun. ♥
if you have a problem with my tweets then why do you follow me Zach
It's called "The Hunger Games"
Spread the love. No matter what language.
"Hey Huey... what are you doing Saturday afternoon?"
oh I plan on it. Later tonight?
Morning all, what a Wonderful Wednesday! We are looking for corporate support for our Jubilee Ball, contact us if you require info
I'm mad how all da celebrities can go To Australia to perform ,but when it comes down to da USA only half of Them can show up to a concert.
Eric Church just hasn't been the same since he didn't make the first cut of Menudo auditions last summer.
Take a shot for me.
greatest song ever!
I'm determined to enjoy this day. Too much good about it. RIP Zachery Tims.
I certainly think it was at LEAST when Bush ran!! and why would they stop there?#US2012 #
Watch today to find out if your orange juice is safe...I wonder if it's even juice.
Pinada gone for season!!
100th tweet:) dedicated to I <3 you!
I find my reviews are shorter of late. Dunno what that means.
Acting like Harden wouldn't start over his ass if Harden was on the Lakers...
We recently launched an all new Photo competition on our Facebook group
I'm bored and tired of being on the computer
When I sleep late and take two naps and im still tired 😲💤
if you could please stay out of my relationship that would be amazing. bye.
I HOPE YOU GET DIVE BOMBED BY AN EAGLE ON YOUR WALK TO WORK
put out some good #music & tweets and you shall be RT'd and FF'd accordingly. ;) I do appreciate the #shoutout, homie! Xoxo
'Justin Slays The Haters' Is he even old enough to buy anything to slay us with!?
Thanks for the great, healthy PRE-tan! Very efficient and organized and I LOVED it.
you make me feel unloved </3 :'(
But not from my boobs lol
same here what did u do over da weekend
Gravity still makes us fall.
I might be in this parade.... PLus my moms gotta party to go to... I got this house to myself ...
One to beam up
“: Are you ready for some SPOTLIGHTS? #esif2012”
I can't help but hear the Karate Kid song in my head when I see that.
yeah especially now that we're of age, lol shit is serious.
MWW Designs has changed their fax number, new #: (312) 533-2245 // Our telephone number remains the same.. Proceed with your day ;)
Only a week (or so) until our User's Conference in Santa Fe!! 120 attendee's this year - we're so excited!
shit got real once I found them almonds
We've got some used equipment to share with you. Email with your shopping list!
My fourth week
I LIKE TO KEEP PEACE NOT MAKE WAR
nice. RT : I passed that mark the first day I got a smart phone.
Maybe this is a stupid question, but emmy award winning? that's real?
More of what we saw yesterday. Cano hurting the #Mariners. RBI double there. #Yankees extend the lead 6-1.
Having a very good #sportsbiz weekend in Denver. At Avs-Canucks game tonight. Golf tomorrow at Omni Interlocken.
Billy Cundiff must be kicking himself right now. Oh, wait... he probably missed.
I am a statistical king. I own stats!
THIS IS HOW I GET GROUNDED FROM TWITTER.
No one understands me and how i really feel. I hide it all but no one feels the pain and stress i deal with every day from when i wake up
No(: ": Get Started Today $230+ Today, Using Twitter 100% FREE To Join! www.GreatCareerPath [.Info]"
Yes didn't go so well..tehy are almost gone ... no will power to throw them away!
you are just a wannabe. All your antics and yet nowhere near Floyd in star power
Sometimes I feel like I'm wasting my time on you, but I can't let go.
Everyone is trying to kiss Octavia Spencer and she just wants to get to the stage
more jokes for that special
is there a hashtag?
I'm I'm Chicago, did you like my website?
No they totally contradicted themselves They told Chef Samuelsson last week less is more than & then pick MacMillan this week?
i just died.
so private party tonight wit dancers hmu 9104947955 if u wanna party get money girls on deck
It's silly to play JaVale McGee and Timo Mozgov at the same time. But could they please be in a sitcom together as tall, bickering roomies?
7 days left and 3 of them comes with football practice after school. Oh well 3 more days of hitting people :)
i think that ive been holding this in for too long and i'm at my breaking point.
Wow I said luke alliger instead of james smh that's embarrassing ( ._.)
Thanks for the game tweets. Keep 'em coming.
the tattoo! lolol
Im creating a series of noted around my house to remind me to workout :) lets go!
got your card for tomorrow! X
Ways to piss of neighbors: become a drummer, then also download obnoxiously loud dubstep.
I'm so sorry about that! If you contact our cust. service, we'll get it taken care of ASAP! /888.717.6257
thanks for fun and i are home safe.
The Solid Suns' set at the Hard Rock Café began with the audience singing Happy Birthday to John the lead singer.
Is anyone having issues with #EBSCO databases right now?
we talkin bout s.w.a.g
Preparing for the North American Engaging Times Summit 2010 in Chicago!
Love yourself so no-one has to.
in line about to meet Patti Lupone, apparently the gays are fans of hers?
Thanks Hannah! I lost mobility in part of my right hand but I'm hoping it's only temporary : /
it was super fun! except my feet were killing me because i was dancing in 4/5 inch heels
I didn't notice this till right now 😳😳
Down to Maryland for lacrosse
yes. Exactly yes to all of that.
Defintely! College is kicking my butt
RT Friend just told me she showed images from a lynching in class & a student honestly thought the man was bungee jumping.
RT : Love your enemies because they bring out the best in you.
just been looking for jobs. How was the move?
Anyone have any experience with using glue in their mouth?
RT : . ' session will be a tactical look on how to utiliz events to source candidates. #SourceCon <-
Why is Sunday Funday trending. I hate Sundays.
Now you're feeling more scholarly I hope =)
LMAO, yes it is.
praise the lord for jersey mike's.
The weirdest ones are the ones that play Christmas music.
I'm going H.A.M. Cam Newton
: MAY 17TH. 6PM. AURUM LOUNGE. BE THERE. LET'S NETWORK!” IN THE MIX ATLANTA
Madisen is Shaunie, Antanae is Evelyn, and I'm Tami. Lol they said I had to be Tami because I'm mean. My language is NOT dirty though. :/
dangerously close to my home base. call me if you're down to keep drinking? will have to hit that keg asap.
Ketosis. Body switching from burning carbs as fuel to burning fats.
Great Taxi service in Baltimore. Yes it's possible. Lost items, comments leave here Thanks BaltTservice Improving taxi quality in Baltimore
Just woke up and now I'm chilling
Yes. According to , FUBU is trying to increase its market share in the booming business of black college athletics
our pleasure. thanks for doing what you do for #fostercare kids.
Some people talk so slow and explain the most obvious things you just feel like your brain is dying listening to them
haha oh but I am.
A bad bitch up on my a side and she giving brain.
Dobby's Sock. :P
Just met Stephan a la Rue Cler Market. Says he is coming to SEA to help you open an Oyster Bar!!! Tres Bien!
just take some ecstasy and jizz in your underpants you dirty slut
Anyone been on the Housatonic this week?
RT : this weather is perfect. im over working today. and for the week.
network! It's all about who you know unfortunately.
Guy just waved at me on the Max. I honestly don't know him but he looks familiar. I think he's friends with my sister. Idk.
I'm going to make a birthday hat out of incomprehensible constituent letters!
Today’s Downtown specials are: Soups are Wild Mushroom and Tomato (vegan). Sugar free lemonade today is Cucumber mint.
Jeremy Lin benched tomorrow for only dropping 10 points. 15 minutes of fame almost finished.
“: my mom ALWAYS mad”
Im seriously so happy right now. jsdfhldkjghkjshgkh.
I know you have been hurt, I can tell by the way you carry yourself.
Have fun! #payback RT Heading to the #Bulls game tonight. Payback time for the
are #energizers Presbyterian? They excite my #sarcasticandsnarky tendencies.
hahaha that was too funny
thanks so much wish you could be here!!!
I hate that Bon Iver says his name wrong.
El mariachi juvenil de bryant Webster...beautiful music to start first general session
#np Dear Prudence by The Beatles
“: "I know I'm not the unluckiest person out here. I'll be back." IK Kim” Hard to watch, handles it like a pro. # cruelgameattimes
Thanks for the follow !
what's that turtle trying to tell you?
I feel like Twitter is soon gonna turn into Facebook with people playing twitter games and getting twitter "wives" and "husbands"..
Don't do that :(
woh woh woh good sir!!!! Seattle Invented coffee, ok well maybe not, but we we're the first to do it right. But Portfolio was good
is there a Skip cameo?
And now I'm starving
Be a problem solver! Provide solutions in your content.
Letting go of my type of life is difficult, but I think I've been comfortable like this too long.
Back to 7th grade? Here in your arms? #Don'tCareProbAwk
CALL FOR VIP TICKETS FOR THE PARTY BUS 786-223-1654
Yeah, its like that.
Weird question but how do you get on a cosmetic company's list for that? I'd love to get press releases! TY.
Shower felt great
yeah there is some Star Wars in the mix for me as well as wine
Native app- built for target platform. Web app- write once, pub once.
Thank you for spamming me ryan
Expired toppings? Did they not just open?
I feel like slam-dunking in the middle office right now.
Checking out Film Socalisme tonight can't wait for Godard's new provocations...
Letters to juliet: LAME
“: You ain't shit if you didn't have AOL when they were by the minute!!!” he'll yeah they u to bombard ya mailbox with dem cds
nice ! That helpful. !
Startin to get mad
Thank you for the anecdotal evidence I appreciate your perspective
Prayed tonight that my desire to continue to grow would continue to grow.
well text back I got something to ask lmao
Are You Fucking Kidding Me ???? F_ck The Voice -.-
I Need A Selfish L.O.V.E
Wow. Just saw your vid on Models Unleashed. Very nice. Keep up the great work :-)
#wwyd if ray ray ask you out on a date?...
This is exactly why i didn't want you to help. I knew from the start it wasn't a good idea.
I'm always going to picture you guys in your NYC apartment sitting on the floor, nerd bonering over stones.
well... There's my blond moment 4 the week. I need to dye my hair #artificialintelligence :-)
#HIRED Congrats Ty, look forward to seeing you this summer!
Come what may.
Indiana's poet laureate to read her work at Purdue University Calumet 11 a.m. today, Y Jean Chambers Hall, 353 Student Union/Library Bldg.
I mean, I thought there was a book in your newest post that had to do with marketing.
The problem with Bootstrap is you can totally tell what uses it, and while it looks good I am already bored with it.
Q: Why don't Deputy Fire Marshals look out the window in the morning? A: So they have something to do in the afternoon.
RT Mechanical bull rides are a good place to meet someone with busted genitals.
Woo! Right?! :D RT : RT : "When was the last time you said 'I love my work. #ASTD2012 About 5 minutes ago!
Got stung by a wasp on my pinky finger while cutting grass about 90 minutes ago. Forgot how painful they are. Holy cow! Still hurts!
I can't stand rude people
Thanks for the rt. It's a great film!
Have you ever lived with people who make less than $10/day? The comparison might seem less meaningless then.
Nice day today! #Denver!!!
With the Munchie Diet I had portioned meals and snacks, so I never let anything go to waste!
No work not sure what to do tonight.
I like the Foaming Hand Soap best.
Don't miss the grand open opening of the exhibits tonight at 5 pm.
Photo #follow Photo
Wait, what's a lie lol?
that's a big improvement
nice! I did a 13lb brisket last year in my smoker and it was crazy! Laid low this weekend, lots of outdoor time, grilled a bit.
Thanks for the many mentions Eva, nice to know you enjoyed the presentation. Much appreciated!
Destiny is when you find something you were never looking for and then realize that you never wanted anything else.
Just got thru w/ my last bit of homework for the night smh.... feels like I been doin hw all day.!
okay it's silicone though
Sorry to hear that. Sounds like she's a trooper though.
#ARMORYweek! Jimmy Shack is a contemporary artist working in Brooklyn, New York that will be featured!
I was busy #work nigga. Lol
I suppose girls only huh? Haha
#Evanovich, Finger Lickin Fifteen; Sizzling Sixteen. Bounty hunter Stephanie Plum motors on, but I'm done with these for a good long time.
Oh I know, something like 300 of them. That's why they're so damn collectible! And crazy expensive
Happy Birthday bro! Stay True! sXe till we die!
would you do the same with me ? Even though you Should
Girl: ...on the stage.
i'm freezing lol
Tip 2: Refinement - Refinement exudes sophistication which implies education and wealth or at least the potential for wealth.
with microSD, USB, Android OS upgradeable to Ice Cream Sandwich, lightweight, gorilla glass, keyboard... best on the market! :)
Dear (#Jets GM) Mike Tannenbaum, the team needs WR depth and Al Toon's son is on the board. Let's make this work.
hope to have you through.
Yea I think I can fix it up for you... ;)
Your English is really good. "What we learn with pleasure we never forget" A. Mercier You seem to enjoy learning English.
Know what space your community wants to engage in. Is that Facebook, Twitter, Flickr, YouTube, other?
I'm gonna have to third that!! Come to us right meow!!
: Would you be able to be an impartial juror in the George Zimmerman trial? ^no *denied* ...lol
On the way home.Chicago was great but da Bears traffic was not.
If only you knew
Impressive. Will GOP show us same indicators if they win office & promise to quit if not met after year 1?
Watch this space for 'go' or 'no go' for tomorrow's FREE outdoor show, 'Scaling the Mountain' @ Century Plaza. Fingers crossed for sunshine!
It Took This Long For Me To Learn My Lesson.
Feminism is an entire world view or gestalt, not just a laundry list of women's issues. Charlotte Bunch
RT : I'm going to break down why I think Dynamite by Taio Cruz is a successful pop song in today's world.
THIS IS WHY I'M #WhiteTeam PURPLE TEAM CANT SPELL!!!
17 hours till my paper is due. This is where it gets serious. Marketing, let's go.
follow me . <3
Had my mom french braid my hair... Its been a while since the last time she did my hair
Kids stay in trouble!!
Played with some fellow Emerson alum on set today! Can you say "It's a small world after all" with a Boston accent?
Good half for the #Rapids. Let's get a goal that counts in the second half!
If destruction be our lot, we ourselves must be it's author and finisher. As a nation of free men wewill live for all time or die by suicide
Thank you, such a sweet thing to say. Glad to be here at the right time :)
bout to get ready and head to class
What a utterly brilliant idea. Seriously.
Becoming a total hermit with the impending arrival of our child. Fascinating to watch the changes I've gone through.
I'm not the only one (:
Lots of work today....and a puppy who may or may not let me get to it!
Anything goes we ain't playin fair
MAN SHUT UP! LMAO
So not fair! Wait what dvd's?
CRASH: I-5 south @ I-205, left lanes open, delayed back to Nyberg
Yes, it is. #life RT : Its all so exciting!
Hope it turned out great! RT : just filmed a segment in my office about pastel haircolor! tune in tomorrow during the 8...
Looking for some great decorations and casino themed ideas? www.partyzone-rentals.com
I am so tired...and the weekend of 7am till you drop shifts haven't even started yet.
Blue Man Group tonight...it's going to be crazy! Our goal is to get Denise pulled up on stage with them. She'll never forgive us!
got to run. Forgot I'm volunteering at 11. See you at 12 for meeting
We have a hard time with $4/gal gas but consider that the military pays $130/gal in Iraq and Afghanistan
“: When boys look cute with braces.”
It was nice meeting you in Orlando :)
Thanks for the mention! Hope you're having a great Wednesday!
Did Taylor Hicks turn black?
Hey that's how it looks here!
My mom is en route to the airport for her red eye. And I am going to curl up with Code Name Verity for a bit before bed.
Traveling Circle is playing the Monster Island Festival this weekend in Brooklyn. Check the details here: www.myspace.com/travelingcircle
“: Some day, after mastering the winds, the waves, the tides and gravity, we will harness for God the energies of love.”
yes you are/:
she just now graduated?
1st name an last name ______!!!
Students are coming to campus with mobile devices so #ACU w/n be handing them out anymore.
ok awesome! 2703178082 is my contact info
Miss out on todays clinic? Never fear! We'll be brewing things up again next week: same time, same place, different coffee. See you then!
No but ya pretty much asked all of twitter if they would go to the zoo with ya?
Hahahah just admit it. I'm the boss :)
seriously started to prepare for my speech at #DePaul LAS honors convocation in 2 weeks. My 1st formal speech~~~
Take me or leave me, I'll never be perfect believe me I'm worth it, so take me or leave me<3
I tip my already mostly-tipped hat to you guys!
have you bought the single yet?
you can be older and still be immature...you can be young and be mature...seriously, age ain't nothin but a number.
Never had a Shamrock shake . . . If that thing doesn't get you drunk, I'm protesting!!
Bulls all the way<3
lucky you. but if you are in CA then I will have to go on a DC food truck hunt on my own next week!
if you're into musicals you should watch phantom of the opera...or you could watch dear john if you're in a love story mood
Whose got brunch pics today? Do share!
Dog just picked a huge spider off a wall and ate it. I'm very very very very disgusted and grateful
Look out, world. is extremely caffeinated AND armed with cupcakes. Approach with caution.
“Tis in ourselves that we are thus or thus. Our bodies are our gardens to the which our wills are gardeners.” ~William Shakespeare
Done. Thank you! Looking forward to calling you tomorrow.
“You have power over your mind - not outside events. Realize this, and you will find strength.” Marcus Aurelius
Hope all our friends at PPAI Vegas are having a great time! Stop by booth #6125 and say hi to Mike, Shari, Frank, Barry, Rob & Mick!
thanks for joining our #AIDSWalk12 team! Excited to support this Sunday
Breakout groups for boot camp 1 #thatcamp #lac and #teamrhetoric is representing!
People show what they are really like by what they do, rather than by what
#nw an american affair, this movies so deep
I'm gonna be honest. I really have no idea where we are. I just know what the gps is telling us to do.
Ladies be the lady all men want to have, not the one all men already had.
Im ready to go to gym so i can charge my phone.
The only REAL way to protect yourself against unauthorized key duplication is with PATENTED, not just restricted, keys....
"Innovation will drive quality." -Peter Bernard
Has somebody found the video yet?!?!?! RT : COLBY'S!!!!!
Considering the last time I cleaned my fridge may have been when I was pregnant, I call it nesting. :)
Like. RT : I freeze my H2O w/ #nuun the night b4 so my drink will stay cold the entire run.
and a good morning to you.
I’m hearing the hate but I’m not seeing the hate. You…Oh my God! Did you Botox your face into an expressionless mask?
Thank you Beethoven, Prokofiev, Mendelssohn, and Brahms for making my life so hard lately...
Victory is always sweet, especially when you use your own efforts to earn it.
Now do your part and help raise some awareness to this bastard and help make a difference!
add Denver to the tour!!
Watching the season of Hells Kitchen that my current sous chef was on - hilarious!
Dear men of NYC: Please stop being creepers
I'll take a business person that has to face employees with a payroll as I have. It grounds one, no pie in the sky.
yes but they are flooded...trying to get back to everyone as best we can...
Presenting at #SNAP09 was a treat, great audience, good dialog. #WORM almost home
Woman on bus explaining in loud aggrieved voice that she is being sarcastic.
Who wanna get rated./-'?-_-
Heat needs to just finish this game so they can be done with the Knicks! :O
Same here...not much happened, seeing it is a little too warm to do anything LOL So been staying by the open windows *S*
Oh! Good idea. WE have a room at Mem Union that night but there aren't enough for guests. Excellent!
Funny: at the end of the "why google+ is taking over FB" article there is a "share on FB" button!
I really hope no one says calories
yea that's the finals everyone would want to see.
The night club 2 be @ this Wednesday only
nice :) Jbr is cool man on earth sweet and down to earth
Use the "next" button under the image to scroll through the piece. It was a blast to catch up with so many old friends.
I hope that's not about Sandra...
Wonder what other B-Corporations are in Detroit area. Hope that will support more B-corporations in
I don't believe Lombardi, but that's only because I have no idea what the hell he's talking about
I'm interested in your house hunting, where are you looking to buy, south side of Glasgow?
she said she wants to do the wild thing, let's do it
You're very welcome! And thank you so much! :]
mia is the only1 who liks the sam guy as me tht dosnt irritate me if someone likes a celeb i lik i'm lik no stop it's not lik tht wit her :P
9 out of 10 employees agree. RT The quickest way to demotivate me: make it all about metrics.
Can I be off work now
Frickin yeah! All that stuff is dope!
Quick show of hands: How many people are a little sad there was no snow this morning?
I guess, but this just bothers me for some reason lol RT : i'll give em a pass. Thats that queensbridge love.
beautiful day in the city! Is it Queen's Day?
Also, ranked lists. MT I hate star ratings, grades & aggregate scores. Turns art into sci w/o room for nuanced responses.
I'm talking in general, it was something I never did. Just bought some this week...feeling the difference already
The suburbs always seemed to be about chasing an ideal that doesn't exist.
I'm not sure if I like the Ruby Jane song a lot or not at all. More listenings required. Then I think it'll win me over.
So I played mega millions yesterday for the 1st time and completely forgot to check my ticket...
Officially in NC and am extremely grateful right now for all the wonderful friends I have been blessed with.
Tired of working like a dog and getting shit in return f%#k this...
For some reason I can't imagine countries in Asia and such all too hyped about watching Western movies and TV shows. But...the numbers.
I HAVE THE MOST WONDERFUL HUSBAND . Mi stimabo dushi.
did you all watch american idol? so happy with the results! but really...how bad was this season overall? simon is smart for peacing out ;)
Great random Valentine's Day culminating in good food, good drink, and good music. Actually great on all of those.
glassblowing for 1000.... this item was made popular by a man named snodgrass.
Rudy Ramirez raised this early last year; Castaneda was the one who brought forward the idea of the ballot measure @ last mtg
- your not even fat 😳
best kind of gum: mint or fruit-flavored?
Hi Guys!
My lunch
Now that I have seen a wild alligator, I feel that the Florida experience is complete.
we're just at the what-xtra-software-do-we-need phase for FB opac, haven't seen it live yet.
Did i just make the jv cheerleading
See, now that makes sense to me. The "don't use it!" school seems like it's trying to hold off entropy. Which is a doomed mission.
Ikr they can fight in public not online
What a wonderful day! Vonavi Photography! Captured lots of perfect moments 
See Graffiti? Capture it!
You shouldn't have to be someone else to get people to like you. Me personally? I'd rather be hated for who I am, then loved for who I'm not
Which is worse for the environment, eating from "dead tree" paper plates, or ceramic/glass/china plates, which are cleaned using detergents?
A1: candidates see resume different than recruiters and hiring, can convince themselves they are a fit
Omg unblocked Internet!
Eh, in my opinion the the NHL needs to take a page from the NBA / NFL & do more to protect stars.
I want a nose job so bad!! :(
Why can't everything ever just balance?
According to , 43 percent of women work out with their hair down. Wow...I always do a high bun. How do you style yours?
Did you enjoy the Christmas holiday, or are you feeling like you barely 'survived' it?
I'm all better now!!
Perhaps a good day to watch "Let it Ride"
Other half went to sleep for the night and im still up...ugh!!
I thought he broke the record for position players.
#IWouldDoAnythingFor concert tickets! ❤
Bangin' headache. The sun is shining in my eyes. Drapes closed. Hungover, must die.
Thank ya sir! Roger that. RT : i like your music style keep it up
Pfizer says on lookout for mid-size drug deals | Best Articles And News
Swag. Purple. Canada. Leggo. Never say Never. RT if you thought of Justin Bieber ♥
Ahh! #Jane Eyre is trending! Hurrah! For free access to selected articles on JE go to www.maney.co.uk/journals/bst & click on 'top articles'
Leadership Development training for a client in #OKC this morning. Talking "future & the power of unleashing their team's thinking."
Bobby Womack on stage with
Tango: very nice device but expensive. If you won't use most of its functions, find something cheaper.
Today our goal is to increase our Joy. What can you do today that elevates your mood and brings you pleasure? Give that gift to yourself.
Need a Medical Massage and have a drs. prescription? I accept most health insurance plans. Call for verification.
I did that with MTV. We are getting old.
Oh hell yeah new music thursdays
Happy Hour on our Patio 4-7pm! $2 domestic taps, $3 rails..Tonight is SIN Night! 2 for 1 Rails, 1/2 off Taps, & $3 Root Beer Bombs!
Get that seat warmed up for Sunday!!!
Sometimes, even though you try, you just can't be nice to everyone... Sad
RT "Man is not made to till the soil. His birthright is dominion, not subjection." Mary Baker Eddy in Science and Health,...
Haha well did you write about me? ;)
Yes, worth the time. Although, won't require much time at all for you.
Twitter got grammar?
Some of these girls today need to just slow it down they to fast.
Apperently this little girl thinks im old enought to have a 10, 7, and 5 year old....
I finally looked up what this Coachella thing is. I had thought it was a brand of designer handbag and luggage for some reason.
Voices telling me Im Invincible #BeastMode doesn't sleep. Go #Coyotes I just finished a 10.1 mi run with Nike+ GPS.
Work is a freakin ghost town.
I've made that before! SO GOOD. Have you ever made chocolcat Mousse with coconut milk? Also SO GOOD.
Welcome back to the !
Is that my suitemate??????
Everybody play the tough guy till shit pop off.
it was good, same to you! Keep July 10th on your schedule if your interested in presenting to OVEC districts at our Summer Inst
Sounds good--I have a student coming in at some point, but not sure what time yet...Perhaps just whenever she shows up...
Technology hates me today
The venom of the king
I got it(: signed. plus a t shirt for it being late. DMs?
SORRY TO ALL MY FOLLOWERS IF I SENT YOU SOMETHING SAYING BAD STUFF ABOUT YOU ON A BLOG I WAS SPAMED AND THEN I GUESS IT ALSO WAS SENT TO u
They better sound the trumpets in Utah because their won't be any jazz music being played, more like mariachi music down in San Antonio. LOL
Left My Old Bitch At Home Gotta new One
And of all glad words of prose or rhyme, the gladdest are, “Act while there yet is time.“ – Franklin P. Adams
so great to see you today at #HachettePrev! Did you have a favorite book(s) from today?
I last area beef meeting on the calendar! Area 7 on the 26th!
#BeMilwaukee #GoBucksGo....what's up at the Palace...sad crowd...wow
have a good show babe
you're funny!
RT : Get your #SBXLVI Tees from Indy's finest! Been rockin' mine this week. All eyes on Naptown!!!
Loud music will definitely give u a headache.... lol yesterday was a moving church...
I can't believe I worked more hours than my dude. He's LOVING being a Butcher's apprentice but it's very hard work. I'm proud of him!
lol I'm trying to book a big one for November I'll keep u posted
its not a landmark
Great game!
You know that feeling when you have been troubleshooting for hours, and then you finally figure it out. Yeah, that.
Scariest moment in India so far: Waiter last night recites US history stats for at least 20 minutes. Thought I was going to get quizzed!
": That's nuts about #DCMetro !" Another reason I stay far away from the metro...and the tracks!
#myidol she was the one that let me to keep singing and now im in the performing arts school.
Deleting one 'ha' from your 'hahahaha' cause you think its too much
Me + Internet + Credit Card + Thinking about = $ spent wisely
Glee Prom with Twitterless Julia right now!
Yes indeed...
Watching #RAW :-)
I'm gonna eat then see if anyone wants to hangout.
hahah i will but i dont know his twitter name hha or does he have a twitter? haha how do you want me to tell him?? ahhaa
I would love to see a Joel Mchale and Daniel Tosh duo. Anyone else?
Riley Fest...who knew?!
More than 1 billion people do not have clean water
Bill Nye the Science Guy! Bill! Bill! Bill! Bill Nye the Science Guy!
Nah(: I'm gonna go to ah party >.<3
One word frees us of all the weight and pain of life: That word is love.-- Sophocles
I'm pretty satisfied with my 100%. You go ahead and tell people you give 110%
I am wonderful! Life is good from this end :)
Ghost hunters night!!
Man City giving it away...outrageous.
Talk too much trash? An amazing woman is defined by not just what she says, but what she does. We think you do it well. ; )
How much a person can change in a year is mind boggling.
Looking for Gluten-Free menu items for lunch and dinner? Dine with Los Equipales today!
Im sick of the browns
Dec 20: 50 Cent says "HAPPY HOLIDAY" to the unsigned artist- $500 cash to hottest performance of the night! Club Pyramid, NYC. 18+, 9pm, $20
Rooms #76 & #43 are available tonight! We would love to have you stay with us.
Going to sleep after weekend update.
Can't find me in just one spot
So they sing on the singing bee <3 gotta love it
North Carolina, go stand in the corner with Utah and Arizona.
Tom from the wanted said she's a total bitch. ahaaha. Now every time I see her I just notice how bitchy she comes off.
if u have not done so yet u can be consumed by the data. Every athlete tells u something different. We just have to listen.
I heard he died in his sleep.
Just added a new Facebook Shop to this page. Now you NEVER have to leave FB! New House MD, The Office, and Community graphics coming soon.
A reminder about the flyer they sent you! RT : Boy, I wish my alma mater would email me begging for money some time.
Re-arranged the storage today.
1 dog a shih tzu and a cat named oreo
Go Follow for jokes+fun+advice+followers and more!! <3
Wonderful to see you all today.
Thanks so much ;)
Need #DairyFree #glutenfree microwaveable rice cereal for mom. Any recommendations?
Seems the Tribe and I were crossing paths yesterday seeing as I was just IN Minneapolis haha
mizz independent I c
#harrison smith packers
could you send a copy of the assignment? I would be very interested to see it.
Using to clean up my address book. Hope it works!
Nice one handed grab by Dan Majerle! Get than man a glove!
People can't handle the truth.
I just entered win to a XPS 13 #Ultrabook from
Ha I got an IPhone
I bet he is totally fine and I am making this trip for nothing. Doh!
... Torchlight is a game?
Meeting nana was the best thing that happened to me.
“Writing is an exploration. You start from nothing and learn as you go.” – E.L. Doctorow
hell yea
so true isn't it? this came right on time for me too!
everything is a problem with you
Let your appearance repasent ya money
Some people look over-baked, over-done, over the top! " Don't blame the gun ... blame the person holding the gun" Get a MD w/ experience!
Employee: Can you sign this blank paper for scanning?
Playing tonight @ casa del mar in SM (SOUL STATION) with amazing Terron Brooks and compadres Johnny Flaugher and Rob Perkins. Soul music!
Certainly, one of our talented Artists will be happy to give you an interview.
Still hyped from listening to Crunk Juice for the workout this morning, lol
I know lol
Evacuate the city! RT : I don't mean to alarm you, but Kenny G is performing this evening at The Birchmere.
Thank you Renee at the Tennessee Museum of History for the Waylon Jennings CD.
As a make-up artist, you should see the mom's tv interview. Looks like she faceplanted into bronzer. It's um... interesting.
Have some headache patient today. Love making their headaches go away without drugs!
It's more than I expected before.. I thought it would b boring..
#Broncos 5th round pick is DE Malik Jackson, Tennessee
Yay! Hi there, lady! So psyched you found us! Join us for our pasty project?
aww sweet thanks babe,,ohh i need to go ..talk to u again ..when im on..
rooftop VIP tables ain't no fable
"TRADE ME RIGHT FUCKING NOW!"
Yeah Buddy!!!#JERZathon:))gotta love italian ppl</3
Thank You!! Hope all is well in Jacksonville. Tony
I can help you out, DM and I can show you several aternatives.
RT : We need extras NOW! Interested? Hit us up:
I man I forgot about the pots that were used for tea. Dishes just never end.
Drinking water!
I hate that you can't listen to MLB games via internet radio, but I love that the Tigers game is the free game of the day on MLB radio.
Big shoes to fill.
I hope they do before I die lol and TD is Toney Douglas
Will do!
Thanks for the Dropmark recommendation. How do you use it?
Feelin sick as fuck. Work everyday though.
He was rockin it hard!
got any suggestions for a great year-end #fundraising email? any new angles?
palisades with Antonia
,,,errbody go follow
just wanted to say that you are such an inspiration, keep doing what your doing
#tygerto80k is top of my trend list;)
NEW WEBSITE JUST WENT LIVE!! www.boutiqueeatshop.com check it out
"Friday TSB performs at Vitello's. Grammy Nom Celebration." Will be there!
i saw New Moon last night. It was a really good movie-i loved it!!
Appointment with my doctor Monday- they believe I may have diabetes...very scary
everything about today is perfect ♥
why thank you =] really glad you like it!
justin biebers bday coming to and end.......so ones again happy birthday........
I thank god for giving me the strength and motivation to go to college and make something of my life....
If you go through your life looking for things to complain about, you're definitely missing out on the good parts.
My female followers are so bomb
Are you supporting celebrity board member Warrick Dunn's next event? Check out Please get involved to show support for single moms!
Thanks to everyone for celebrating 10 years of at the 2011 #Milwaukee99. A toast from !
It is so rainy here
Stop in & see our environmental educators at the #GoingGreen Festival at the State Museum!
|#quotes People with clear, written goals, accomplish far more in a shorter period of time than people without them could ever imagine
how does the baseball team only have 3 tv games?! I over here in Austin and I don't get to see them?
I know! That's why I was so surprised. I was getting so much done.
is doing stunning things on the Red Carpet!
Got $50 from my grandparents for my birthday. Should I spend it on Mayhem Fest, or Warped Tour tix or a new Hookah?
I would lose haha
Sounds good! :D
Straight from Fumiko Sasaki's ppt "Its always better to be a Gozilla than a Banbi." Spelling and all.
made a decision not to spend the whole weekend staring at charts
Hungry! Thank god itslunch!!
Aw thank you! <3 I'm so glad you liked it!
And that's not necessarily the worst thing. :) xoxo
Thanks Sarah
haha i guess that's awesome
whoever t old school brotha wants lol would have given anything in the world 2 play a coach like him
Daytona 500 on February 26th and then off the road for about a month... Look for some new youtube videos coming soon!
RT : Got peer-pressured by girl-scouts into buying 4 boxes of cookies today. #GirlScoutCookiesAreTheDevil--yes they r!
My friend not getting donuts haba oh now he is
follow mee please
9/14/2010 Annual technology symposium planned Santa Maria Times
Judge a man by his questions rather than his answers
Big Ben. Steelers D can step forward, just can't backpeddle.
Good Afternoon Warriors, just a couple more days till Spring Break!
Likewise. I had to scramble at the end to get to MKE. Fun seeing you last night at dinner. We'll talk soon, I'm sure.
Found my keys.. yay!
If you refer to your girlfriend or boyfriend as #oomf , you deserve to be single!
how have you been? Haven't seen you 4-ever.
you're welcome! :-)
You've decided not to chill tonight huh?
shut the front door! i didn't know u were on twitter! u could help me. i still dont know what i'm doing here.
If the Broncos make the playoffs, Fox will be coach of the year and Tebow will be a pro-bowler !Take that Mr. Elway...
It's on like Donkey Kong.
should REALLY follow for his birthday!!!! (:
time to take the snuggie into the office and take a nap
I'm on here, and it all makes me nervous...breathe, Bruce, breathe...
Got my passport now it's time for some stamps!
Been living on Panera the past few days. Luckily they make some good ass (and healthy) sandwiches.
So happy I fell asleep early last night,now my day isn't ruined
Congratulations!!!! I wish you a lifetime of happiness and love with your best friend!
#RT I sometimes feel as though the world is ass-backwards. There's no need to explain it, cuz if u dont get it, you probably a cause of it
It's HOT in here. Can someone turn on the AC?
Listening now! Congrats on adding Peter F! to your team.
:) Congrats on your thesis, by the way! That's great news.
John ate all the food does that get u mad lol
Got the final copy of my demo video. Still not happy with the material on it. It'll work for now. I guess I'm picky but it is MY CARRER!
A guy in uniform ☺👍
At urban active
same here
Oprah Winfrey and actor Derek Luke were bullied due to Childhood Sexual Abuse. When are we going to get serious about this problem?
Thanksgiving upon us... Great time of the year to stop and reflect.... What are you thankful for?
Oh, hey php. I'm learning slowly, but surely.
lets just say it pays the bills lol!! What u been up to???
You are welcome, feel free to "follow" us here, on our blog, and on Facebook.
Oh, I want to see that!!!!
someone in baltimore won the jackpot? they could literally buy baltimore and still have a little something something left over.
Sick shot by a great photographer (give some love!)
I just said a pretty bitchy reply to chris aw ☺
Tony the "Prince Charming" shoe-bearing schmoozer with the 12 yo son: already said no about him. It still stands.
Join us at 11:30 for mimosas in the Celebration Gardens. Step-Off is at 1 p.m. Arrive early - #OccupyIndy is in the same area as
I believe in jurisprudence, obviously, but it'd be great to skip rest of trial & sentence #Murdoch & Brooks to lifetime of hacked calls.
My Cuzco done cut her hair now I'm kick her ass wen I see her
There are things I wish I could do, that I will never be able to do because I want to be a good person.
Any artist want to perform @ da 2011 w North AV send stage name an contact to
Service is what life is all about.
I absolutely HATE how the Huffington Post app auto-plays videos on nearly every page. Can't use the thing in public anymore!
HEY YOU'RE MY #TWITTERBFF <3 (:
Daily Dose of Goodness: He who laughs last...didn't get it.
The reality of being a Philadelphia sports fan is sinking back in
Major League is one of my faves. Long live Jobu.
Professional sports would be so much better without the NBA...
#Cuse don't hang your head! You showed a ton of gull to overcome the adversity of the season! You get a Standing Ovation!! #Cuse til death!
hii! How are you??(:
Really amazing what apps can do. I just deposited a check by taking a picture of it!!!
C'mon. Research doesn't always lead immediately to insight. The quantification and data gathering are not sufficient, but ARE necc
just makes the day so much better
No gimmicks
CONGRATS AUSTIN 200K MAHOMIES! We are one big family and no one will EVER change that! We love you!!<33(:
what u been on
It was pretty great haha. The table-top one filled my younger years and I was just reminiscing. Haha
Baltimore to hopfully get Indy Race in 2011, ohh man thats going to be cool!!
Cole Adkins is our strategic accounting analyst and consultant! His work is unparalleled!
You can't convince someone that does not want to be convinced..
I don't have time to play these stupid games.
false sir
I am so thirsty; where is my coffee?!
You wouldn't have hid. You would have been too busy laughing at me.
Mr. Oxendine- I would love to set up a time for you to come to Clayton County and the City of Morrow in particular and participate in our
no Reeboks, sorry
quit trying to be me
Terrific Tuesday!
your so beautiful,one of my favorite victoria secret angels,i want to be like you when im older!XOXO
If we are what we eat, I'm fast, cheap and easy.
Tested the redesigned 1M on iPhone. Thought it was loading slow until we benchmarked 16 submissions. Surprised by 8 second avg.
We cant wait to see you! “: so for dinner/lunch”
RT : I'm the type of person that tries to fall back asleep in the morning just to finish a dream.
follow back and have a productive day
Now these asshats at Aetna have transferred me back to the initial options queue. What a fucking operation these turds are running. 38 mins
So a tourist just asked me was I glad that our tourist season was over. Seems like it's in full force to me. Lincoln Rd is packed!!!
*looks at you* i still dont remember everything... But i remember running in the woods with you... *smiles slightly*
very little. Mostly in the Lin Shaye explanation of 'the further' scene, that was for story not for tech.RX cleaned up the rest.
You made me blush.
Club Amnesia tonight for Tiesto then LIV!
Wishing I was in New York seeing Liu Bolin tonight
This performance of Raise Your Glass is a hot damn mess
I believe U!
Unique Exhibition Opens in New York
If this keeps up I am going to commute on my paddleboard. Hmm. Not a bad plan.
Heck no. IrfanView is it for me. “: MS Paint; the quickest/best logo resizing & file type changing tool there is. No seriously.”
kate! I miss you! does softball start soon? when I have a free Saturday I'll come and cheer you on!! xo
cause people are awkward like that! lol! :P
dear chandelier? Never heard of them. What kind of music do they play??
Im hungry but i wanna go to sleep
And DVDs too, depending on the church...mine also streams. Armchair A.M.E.
Woozy Earth swaying like a drunk!
Three oclock is always too early or too late for anything you want to do. ~ Jean Paul Sartre
. absolutely killed it tonight.
too bad i didnt get to see ya. i miss you so. enjoy SXSW!
Anybody have suggestions for some good websites for workout & fitness advice? Maybe workout regimens & routines?
30% hahaha it keeps getting better
Live from Woodgrove High: Discussing photography with students this morn. The school has an impressive art space!
“Destiny is not a matter of chance; it is a matter of choice.” ~William Jennings Bryan
easy brother, elated about rangers, love them
my phone is on it's last limb
Lets merge art and fashion...
thank you, I feel very blessed as well, love you dear!
Money from strangers with the family <3
Thanks twitterverse for getting the word out. Amazing how many restaurants are calling US.
Just chocked on a cheeeto
Can we decree that any dish "Tony Style" comes with a fried egg on top?
hey pretty girl!!! Great, I finished high school!!
of course!
Thanks. I'll try harder.
Save #money on your #emmy entries. Early deadline is a week from today
What part of "I'm sick so I'll probably be calling you to pick me up early" do you not understand, dad?
“: Yes you MAY #WineWednesday ” cheers!
Writing "Verified Account" in your bio....smh
Gametime!!! Iowa Iowa St in Ames Go Hawks!!
A strong person is someone who after crying themselves to sleep at night, still wakes up with a smile on their face.
no love for the rest of us?
Heard them a few yrs ago. Great! Now if I could just find that brown-haired girl from Nfld who requested "Sonny's Dream"!
No, he had a big owie that needed to be taken care of. The haircut was a bonus :) RT : just for a hair cut? lol
I wonder if i'm alone in really disliking the flow of text in css3 multi-columns
i like.
#piano lessons
Persevere and get it done. -George Allen
RT : Heading over to meet w/ the GenNext group w/ about the #Datotel journey and our involvement in the community
You need to get a bigger American flag - go to Perkins.
Going off to Morehouse in the fall. Fuck Frith and SCF, 4 real. I always will turn a negative and positive!!! On my way #Morehouse Man!!!
So hard to change profile pic on mobile twitter..
Poets of fall....rocks man!!!
Holy fuck I love that movie!
Awesome ... thanks!
IMHO: The world needs more Billy Squier
Confession: the Ramen in the office microwave smells amazing.
Oh lord I'm goin straight to hell for that last one!
Mfs beefin out here ova dese hoes gonna shoot sum1 & not have bail...HaHa!!! She won't visit or answer prepaid calls nor send u a dollar...
I'm gonna pull a Romney and say let Hulu fail. I've sampled Plus, hate the online interface, and content limited on devices.
#OnceYouGetMarriedYouCant hang out with single ppl they are bad influence lol
This day is so sad. ):
Any suggestions on the next restaurant I should visit for food pictures?
which means you end of following mostly men.
Don't waste your time thinking "if only I was prettier, skinnier, etc. He would've stayed with me" honey, you're beautiful & if he's too
me too but they can never find anything sweet to do for us :(
Talking instead of working out
Did you keep it as a pet?!
oh maybe i should go to that snowboarding summer camp in oregon :)))
Trynna Stop Crying
Max pain...Travis porter make it rain.
#Kobe is in #BeastMode!
This is going to be a good year . We can feel it in our bones .
Thx for the tip RT There will be 8! Glamorous Chicks Cosmetics are amazing! Check them out. :)
Try our chargrilled chicken fruit salad for a sweet and savory treat.
What has the world gotten to? 1 person driving 4 others on the phone!
Uh oh... looks like it's time to return to.... TECH!
About to see a giant rock! 320 tons.
day off Wednesday. But I'm always at joes ;)
It sucks when you know things will never be the same :/
any way to change email addresses from one edu to another. Can't find any way to do it on the licenses area
why am I not surprised
At work tired ass hell
I say a huge AMEN to that!! He was awesome and anointed!
You give me butterflies
More: Bartleby's Book of Buttons, Nova Elements, Monster at the End of This Book, ColorSplash, Pages, Wikipanion, WebMD
No one told me lifting weights would make me sweat as much as running!
I love my April Challengers!! So encouraging of each other and keeping e/o motivated #loseweight #challenge Go Team!!!!
In order to have wat you want you have to fight for it
no! I didn't even see this one I'm gonna have to look into it a little more and see what we can do
discourse is done in common at all levels, that's the beauty of it.
oh, no! Is it because of all the closing Mass ave. business?
Can I get a what what?!
#dhtrial judge took d atty inside chambers. Separate from abc atty woman. (Asked that she stay out)
happy Jonas day <3
what's that suppose to mean?
Tonight on I REMEMBER, the author of "Bay View" joins Jim Peck to talk about its history and strong sense of community. At 6:30 on MPTV 10.
One of those nights where I hate being single :/ RT if u know the feeling
Safe travels, Dmitry! Seattle is waiting for you! :-)
u r gonna rock in buffalo! cant wait to see ya out there when this lockout business is done. play hard son!
Dx i wish but im fucking tiered, but maybe ill go cause you know your mom wants me haha j/k
Leggooooo #CELTICS!!!! They need to give my boy Johnson more burn you dig?
Laying in bed blessed with the support from friends family and new fans of my music. Thank you everyone :)
Did you know that when someone annoys you, it takes 42 muscles to frown, But only takes 4 muscles to reach out and smack'em in the head.
Tweet tweet. Skeet skeet.
for life... i have a headache... for life... i have a headache... nope t not as fun w/out Bamryn
awww....I swear your heart is just going to flat quit one day. U going to your appt?
Haha our house is so massively big, mom has to call my cell phone to call me. If she yells, I won't hear. :P
just cleared space in my room for your poster. RT THIS IF YOUR HAND HURTS FROM SINGING ALL OF THEM <3
Fuck, I want you
don't assume things that you don't even know
you're my life♥
you weren't sick freakin lair
smells like chicken liver
haha, don't let the door hit you on the way out
After my occasional parenting from Skype for a year, will my daughter think I'm a computer game?
We just updated our website Shutter Designer pages. Head on over to www.estatemillwork.com and let us know what you think! Thanks!
Do we get a prize for being one of the first 100 to follow ?!
Very true! Have a great week!
That awkward moment when somebody retweets some shit you tweeted days ago. The fuck you up to?
Just got your email. Send your friend my email address and I'll spit that virtual fire
Great Topic!!! Very important!!
goin home saturday watchin ustream friday and sunday well nothing
BOXING IS NOT DEAD!!! Just needs the right ppl to market the new up and coming stars! #Boxing>UFC
you think so?? Wait until you see me :P
RT:It is official, 2012 Assumption College Commencement Speaker....at least until a bigger college asks you to...
March WILL be different than February.
Come for Happy Hour this evening Always a good look.
Humm...what to do this weekend? We've got free Hawaiian Music Concert, Sam Choy Poke Competition and more. See you !
follow back please?
Avoid using “quotation” marks “incorrectly” and where they serve no “useful” purpose.
check out my bls
Mantis is an amazing 3Dscanner! RT Coming to in Minn? will be showing the brand new amazing Mantis Vision "F5"
stop tweeting and start working
I'd rather live in a church and devote myself to God.
davaid sedaris last night was or course hilarious, and surprisingly crass! oh and he really likes the word 'chilling'
Haha!! DEFINITELY a school house drama moment! Thanks for sharing!
#20ThingsAboutMe i dont smoke or drink
duh... i would hate myself to EVER miss my god sisters Bday
Help our management company Sage Hospitality, turn Denver's Union Station into a living landmark, choose the hotel...
Thanks for watching!! :D
This dude sounds like a robot.
Lecturing on the push for the Dec. of Ind. in 1776 and on the Politics of the Young Republic; rather than what are on both syllabi!
Look forward to seeing you at Homecoming tonight! Hail to Pitt!
Nerdiest moment of my life: musicologists joking about a database search for a list of Phrygian cadences resolving to C.
happy birthday, I hope your day was magical;D
Albany area people- I'll be participating in some teach ins in Academy park today. 1:30-4PM. Anarchism praxis kind of stuff.
Genesee Bakery & Deli has the same policy, and I stand behind that policy in general.
Hey Guys Brunch is going strong!Come on in ... we can do brunch all day.Finish brunch off with Scooters Frozen Custard!! Yes,Yes Yes!!
I wish your tweets weren't protected! I'm just trying to retweet you but it's so much effort
Wow my Sunday is awesome. Hello my twitter followers:o)
good to see you man!! Safe travels!
Dude responded to my comment with his number, offering to give me the "truth" about Alamo. I called him, he paused, then hung up.
OK, I slept most of the day yesterday then half of the day today. I didn`t even stay up late last night.
": is one of the hottest producers in the game." Appreciate that Sweat!!!
Said it all my life, been spending all this time, see every time I see you, it's just enough.Cause you & I were meant to be together in love
first thing you do: go through it and purge all out-of-date information.
I feel really sick and u
The way she act like she dont want to admit , she deserve an oscur .
#Tebow is like the bizarro Lebron, he must have traded all his 4th quarters in for
I named my iPod 'Titanic' so when I enter it in iTunes it says 'Syncing Titanic' and I feel like a hero when I press 'Cancel'
Final details for SUPERDRAFT2010 being put to bed...
Going back to the hotel!!!!
Why Do People Who Go To Drake Concerts He Sucks <<<
Thank God for phone service. Early morning island clean up, swimming , dinner, then bonfire. Im loving it
Praying #cowboys Fumble the Ball ... Dear God I'll Be Thankful for A Dolphins Win....
can you be more specific? I'd love to hear about your insights into our fundamental mistakes!
yes just not very often. about once every other month :-)
Hey! Just sending some love to our favorite ppl in SLC! Hit us up if you need anything!
Imagine: a hybrid of Steve McQueen, Paul Newman, & yet-undecided 3rd man-god (for now, Clark Gable). What feminine Voltron could match it?
Ellen, I know you get this all the time but how do I apply to work for I love watching you and your show, so fun! Keep it up
Ha this is you during the past week RT : Three more sleeps!
He started as an AT-PG driver...which was just a pogo stick with a blaster on the handle.
On behalf of Roxie, BearBear tweets :Wasn't there electricity in the past?
#nowplaying Same Mistakes -
Not yet. From the books it seems like there are just WAY too many story lines! I can barely keep the four girls straight!
You're the best, Dina! Thank you!
I don't like Dave lol
Loving all the prom photos on Facebook. Last eve we saw several at the bowling alley. Pretty dresses, not slutty :-)
Hey Rick. Thanks for following!
you did a good job raising ♥.
Go Pack Go!
Young gays don't hate on me cause you see yourself where I am:mid 40's and no longer the belle of the ball.Learn to do stuff.Cuteness fades
Everyone is an expert at something. What are YOU an expert at? Use your expertise to your advantage to get some media coverage!
On Ramp is on!
Well don't think I can I go to da movies..Smh
Nope. Plain ole' human error, not Evil Empire of Greed error.
Ahh the beauty of living plants! E voce.
She's amazing.<3
When I try to drive the speed limit my mom tells me to slow down. Someone please explain.
Want to learn about Strengthening Discovery? Catch the masterclass session with at Online Information! Tues Nov 29 @ 15.30
Lion installed. Mouse scrolls backwards. Makes you go hm
Hope everyone in Denver has a happy Friday today!
I bet! I'm so excited for you!!
who won best of show? Bummer I missed judging this year.
Can't sleep.
Greys Anatomy. You get me every time everytime!!
#blogchat Don't let perfection be the enemy of the good :)
no my friend u suppose to like the steelers lol
We like to call that a Bolo Tie - Yeehaw!
4/11/12 at 10pm on Discovery ID, FBI Criminal Pursuit, I play investigating cop.
i cringe at that movie
Some people are meant to fall in love with each other, but not meant to be together.
.twitter my updating at bad so am i
A mixture of Myspace, SKype, G+, and with the live feed on the side Twitter. YIKES. My dad will not figure this out ;)
Everyone go do yourself a favor and go watch "The Hunger Games" just a phenomenol movie!!!
shout outs all day to a 503 rep
Wishing everyone a safe and relaxing weekend!
Satan portrayed as "the architect of secession" in American pop culture via letter envelopes. "The first secessionist was Satan."
It is, especially if you sleeping in it, speaking of sleep, bab tired, so goodnight boo, sleep tight x x x x x x x x x x ♥ ♥ ♥
Determine ghd straighener If Dreamweaver Is Ideal For you
WILL NEVER KNOW HOW MUCH I CRYED CUZ NOBODY WILL TAKE ME TO MILWAUKEE TO SEE HIM, I'D EVEN BUY VIP TICKET. I LOVE YOU CODY 1
Just seeing the goals of the Pens game, you can obviously tell if you make a mistake against the Pens, they will make you pay for it.
I agree
Strega waterfront @ Boston's fan pier an absolute must !
alright fine!
haha. No thanks
Because Im grounded Im gonna do things I dont do that much, like take care of my skin, nails and workout. Yay!! Have a nice day boobears
Does Lina ever talk???
I've missed 3 race days in a row. I'm having #NASCAR withdrawals...
Jay Paris: Seau's was a permanent answer to a temporary problem
RT Idk y i even trip on u simple ass niggas
So true: never forget that #DC is really just a small town. you'll never know who will turn up at your next job/party/interview
. I think a boycott of tourism in North Carolina would say something.
Good morning texts are my favorite 😊
Thanks for tweeting this verse, I sure needed it today!
Ha! Yes. Emails soon!
Mom and sister in the kitchen cookin up somethin delicious. Dad and i watchin football. Life could not be any better.
Watching The Bodyguard with my dad. First time I saw it I was 6!! Still love it.
making a pizza for me and me kids.
Who is coming to TLG/FCCMA 2011 #TLG2011? Check out all the innovative sessions at www.tlgconference.org.
it would be prerecorded, obviously. You could just call it "that guy"
Orange is an awesome color! :) Enjoy the game!
hi 5 of us are going to Germantown tonight. Meeting in lobby at 4:30. You are invited :)
when will tickets go on sale???
damn, that's nice man!
Done deal. Vikings will get a new stadium built. RT Senate passes Vikings stadium bill by a 38-28
Just got the word Shock G; from this day forward he's only putting satin on #clippers women's panties
we have to figure out how to get an in game on ice pic
It hurt watching the replay
#Lakers, #Clippers, AND #Kings! What a day to be an Angelino!
I think you do. Just because you were bad with someone before, doesn't mean it'll happen with someone else.
no plans yet to release data at the moment but we do hope to make #3D models available via web viewer soon!
Thank you for the mentions today! May the fourth be with you.
nah cigs dawg it been a long day
Good ol David Lynch!
Understatement of the playoffs so far #BeyondMessedUp RT : Man, this game is messed up.
EB and WB I-70 at Holly... 2 crashes both in the left lanes. Pass it on and warn your friends who take 70!
RT : I hope & are inundated w half-marathoners this gorgeous afternoon!
we live life 2 learn lessons
guys that choose a BITCH over their 'best friend'<
"Sick" or "stick"? I'm confused.
Can already see the smoke from Woodburn HS as we head south on I-5
I have arrived! Smile and say HI.
POST SOME GOOD ART FOR ME PEOPLE!!!!!
now THAT is a headshot, boo!! GORGEOUS!! xoxo
Then we're going out. With the guys or without. GNO! Sound good?
Well our offer on the house was accepted, looks like I'm moving.
So..I heard you're a player. Well nice to meet you, I'm the coach.
I will not answer to "Boss". Unless you're referring to me as Rick Ross, of course #realtalk #ugh #Rozay #Teflon #MMG cc:
Before finals & the holidays sweep up your time - start considering studying abroad through SCT! Dublin & London Summer & London Fall 2010!
I've seen that place, but always thought it was just selling hot tubs. Cool!
woke up sick as hell this morning <\3 .
"Nothing Else Matters" by Metallica still gets me misty-eyed.
Tweet me this... Tweet me that... #PromotionalProducts are all the Twitter! Happy Hump Day... Make it a good one!!!
Anyone done some targeted advertising on Facebook? Yeah or Nah?
Etrade put an extra 1000 in my account! But before I could do anything they took it out. ):
Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass Harass
who was the Manhattan College transfer in your trivia the other day?
getting everything packed to go to Arizona tomorrow and build the sets for my shoot this weekend!
To anyone looking for me at #bigomaha, I'm the tall blonde. Don't be looking for pink hair anymore.
Seriously. In that small little room with the "pimp couch" and the rotary dialer phone.
Fellow Brown grad here. Would love to chat about a poker opportunity. DM or email me at . Looking forward to connecting
At Alterra people watching rather than jamming on my projects. I keep finding myself playing the "how do these people fit together" game.
Gore all day
hahaha Oh god
Our shish kabobs were amazing! I think I'm going to have to arm wrestle Ellie for the leftovers.
Blessed is the influence of one true, loving human soul on another. ~George Elliot
#nowplaying jamie foxx-can i take you home
- Sounds great. Let me know if you tour in NYC.
I choose to finish writing scripts and damn near had to make a mad dash for the rest room...
Looking forward to watching your piece on this Sunday.
glad to have ya back my friend!
People are not all the same. So live life and love everyone. Till you find that reason not to.
#Philly, everyone should come and party with the to Zydeco tomorrow! Bonus, the drinks are fantastic. No joke.
Five Guys is opening a location two blocks from my apartment! Today is turning into a glorious day
the nature a la carte pic!
very cool! Do you ever blog about things other than lit, literacy, math and science?
dibs in 6 months!
I need someone to buy as many champagne bottles as they can and I will pay them back right away
exactly. I like being with friends more than sports.
Relate 100% of topic 2 their personal interest/goal. Wannabe baller kid? Do mock ESPN interview w/child on subject.
she's on NOW!!
I keep running into you, but we still haven't scheduled lunch! Let's do it ASAP! :)
First remove the SQUIRREL !!!
thanks for the follow
Thank you.
WMYB on the radio:)
ian i know you and your crew will kill it tonight love you!!!!!1
i still owe you a lap dance
is celebrating Mollys bday at osteria marco! then- the lure, and who knows what after :)
by review i mean studying not like going to school to review or anything...
Alright, looks like I'm heading to the game.
I hate homework :(
Okay, kitty, you win. I'll move the boxes so you can get up on my desk. Just don't go falling off, okay? Okay.
I thought it was "pearl necklace" people reacted poorly to as a phrase. Guess its all how you use it
OUR BEING IS IN HIM (Acts 17:27-28) Live, move and exist in us Father God. We trust you and love you. #Sir Court
my b he's 36 in a few days
I find myself to be pretty. Never hot
One-arm hang time in handstand and headstand this morning. Don't know what it means, but I have an overwhelming urge to say...BOOYAH!
#TheThingIHateTheMost People always announcing they need new "texting buddies" y'all need to be lookin for a Life...
Now #StateFarm has commercials during football games. What happened to the #doublediscountcheck commercials?
I am team unfollow if you stop following me
fromage d'cottage
Hello Greta van der Rol. Thank you for your follow.
Thank you! It's nice to hear the good stories about citizens who care and who take time to say thank you. Keep up the good work
Special guests...
lol lil kid: told his dad i dont like skinny jeans dad: why? Lil kid: cuz that mean i would have 2 cut off my balls i dont want 2 be a girl
No packer game = working the daily grind of projects!
well that one on Gibson is in easy driving distance..
you should catch some of the PBR (pro bull riding)Finals! Supposedly best weekend and busiest in Vegas
cool. how is he feeling about chances? i think he's going to win by republican default-sucky candidates! thoughts?
Do we have a meeting on LL2 this afternoon ?
is incredibly handsome. <3
Thanks for sharing!
- Oh, and just one more reason for me to justify buying an iPad :)
last night I had a dream featuring #Estrellita by Manuel Ponce... have you heard #Heifetz play that? Soo beautiful
I think "Bitchin'" is my favorite use of "bitch."
awesome, keep me updated.
Giddy up to Amici's Tonight! After diner crowd enjoy Nashville recording artist Shane Byrant w/Drink specials & $5 martinis starts at 9pm!
5yrs ago I knew a lot of hiphop heads that wouldn't be caught dead listenin to "techno"
You is a closet freak, but you is a cute one. :)
Welcome! Follow back :)
Rule #1 of today's web development... Do NOT have music auto-playing on your website. Not cool and very 1999ish.
You've managed to figure Twitter out.
your a scene
What time will you be on the air tomorrow?
Character may be manifested in the great moments, but it is made in the small ones. - Phillip Brooks
Oh thank you beautiful!
If u guys don't have nothing to say nice about , then don't say it. Keep off her twitter page u bunch of a**hole bullies.
Im bring the Kush Hour the Bay Area and LA next month
OMG Im sorry! ): Now I feel bad!
Can't wait to finish these tracks up!!
yeah:D and yes i know i watched him on ellen
Don't feel good at all. I think I need to lay down. :(
hell yea!
should have an update for you soon, working a few angles on tourney.
Big congrats to Bubba Watson!!
Very true. RT : Issue is: some tech - though very cool - was created BEFORE society decided it needed it.
Sometimes life just really sucks.
OMG!! The guy I love just told me I'm BEAUITFUL!!!! I love him so much
I saw your tweet to ...HAPPY BIRTHDAY MAHOMIE(;
Reading the list of what you're passionate about promoting, I get excited. Thanks!
If you're not following stop whatever you're doing and get them in your feed. They're gold, I'm telling you, pure gold
nic lived and is doing very well. The child that died is different
Start of bath "I don't want to take a bath" End of bath " I don't want to get out" I can never win in this house of monsters
I have had Time Bomb by Rancid stuck in my head for daaaayssss
I hate buns. HATE.
take her out!!
MAS Mission: Audio Society. Coming to WHBC soon!
Hoe up????? GOTTA BE A FOOL
well that was a great nap first period 💤
LOL AT 's new video! I love it!<3 :)
I'm making a promise to you: I will have deleted my Tumblr by the time I'm 90 and my MySpace by the time I'm 50
People are persuaded by reason, but moved by emotion; the leader must both persuade them & move them - Richard M. Nixon via
BOSTON ROCK'S LIVE'' started: Wed, 15:01 PST
Today seems like a good day to make some new scarves!
This is the worst possible scenario
200 would make for a very interesting chase
You were so good today!! I am really proud of you I know how hard that role was but you were amazing!!
please follow me <3
Happy Birthday to you !!! Hope u have an amazing birthday!!!! The #BBN has much love for you!!! 💙🎁🎉🎈
im bout to get righter lol
#IFindThatAttractive Not ignorant nor arrogant 😒👎👎 miss me with that
I need new money! Old money not spendn right!
RT I'm thinking about unfollowing you. Since you're so head over heels for this chick
RT : Find/make a place to go when you're stressed. For 5 minutes/5 hours, use it to recallibrate
If #MCFC win the league, thoughts on #USMNT Tim Howard save on Ferdinand late today 2 help them? cc:
omg deadweight! forgot about that! hahaha
countdown to the weekend festivites...cherry blossom festival, Easter, egg hunts...oh me oh my the fun. Sit back relax, and enjoy life!
Just seen the Barlow dunk. Sullinger should've immediately substituted himself out of the game.
Sure wish was open & efficient like Foreclosure doesn't take a break for turkey and dressing.
maybe look in your DM (direct messages) ?
Wish I lived Japan I could have all the Japanese food I want.
yes it was.
Thank you!
Yes! +1 on the library coffee delivery service!
I don't think I can it has to be near Chicago IL my mom is not gonna bring me all the way over there
Nick Knight! <3
Vanessa ... dexterous modes of concealment
Making Funfetti cupcakes
See you soon texas
im gonna live my life, no matter what we party tonight!♥
U G L Y You ain't go no alibi You ugly you you UGLY ;))
I can't wait to hear it because I know it's smooth. Plus I need to use it! Man thanks again.
I need some soft hands on me ladies
Its Not Pretty Good Its Amazing<3333
LIghts out in San Fran on monday night football.
yep im on my way to u now lol
I actually kind of agree. He didn't look terrible last year. He scooped a few difficult throws. But does power make up for his K's?
Gave the pilot version of the BELT-3 all day...3 year olds are so cute!
99 out of 100 people over here in the U.S don't even know about the UK riots. Fkn
Tip: If you survey me and ask if I want to be contacted about my (bad) experience and I say yes, then **contact me**
I love my wife , she's the best!
My sister bought it for me! D: LOL RT : DA FUCK ARE JEW DOIN @ SONIC WITHOUT ME!?
I be ballin' all alone like the gym is vacant.
She makes a wish on every single star she sees, yeah somewhere deep down she believes
yes. Words to tweet by.
2 bad bitches at tha same damn time!
Hmm I'm sure thats an estimate just to keep us from filling it with 8 pages worth of images hah. Maybe aim for close to that?
Gary Williams, Johnny Holliday, Len Bias to be honored this ...
Pleasee Follow me [:
Heading to Indy for the Superbowl, adjusting to Mid-West life
If I had to pick one, I'd say Harrell right now. Too early to get a gauge on what Trocha's going to do.
A7. RT : I think social media can provide a safe place for us to advocate and share our stories.
Survival tip 101 from "when you're camping use a fork as a comb"
Poor you! One Zito fan on the entire planet, and he plagues you.
Here's hoping you heal up quick and get back to sleeping - cause that's where more dreams and tales come from!
Congrats on your walk off blast to win the game yesterday
First order w/ Totsy = not impressed! Hoping they can fix it, but we'll see.
#Coffee & determination will get me through today's work load!!
It will cover chaps 6,7,8,9 from the G/K text and related readings from Moodle, TAP, etc. Tomorrow will be on chap 9
are we at Defcon 1?
Kemp with Home run. #Dodgers 4 #Brewers 2
I know! Have you taken advantage?!
lol yea blame it on the alcohol
No. Not like that at all.
I am so angry at those drunk couch-burners for giving UL fans something to repeat over and over like a broken record. Thanks, assholes.
Sisterly binding &
Why is everyone so hot???
#SoListen is number 40 in the pop category on iTunes! we can't get enough of this song! SO GOOD(:
Jeremiah has red lipstick on his nipple...
It's awfully nice out there. Worth making the trip.
welcome to twitter amiga
We moved the EWG food conversation over to , please follow us there! This channel is no longer active. Thanks!
FOLLOW FOR 5 FOLLOW BACKS ASAP!
I am in atlanta and taught esl / efl for 3 years
I just signed up for gmail. This is a giant leap for mankind.
man this weater at the chi-town !!!!! is amazing bout to do some raw
Happy St Patty's. Errands, performance in VA, back in time to maybe make it out???
RT Lady gaga was in our rendition of midsummer night's dream. Houston - it's worth it.
The Hampton's were fun this week..goodbye beach...thanks JLev412..
Happiness is 750 ab reps at the gym yesterday plus weight training & cardio, happiness is the day after soar abs! Happiness is life!!!
AH!!!! I need tht book now!!! I want Peeta and Katniss together soo bad!
cold pizza is my kryptonite! I love Chinese food; for some reason, not leftover. Unless it's fried rice! Xo xo
A tail of two of my teams one goes on a 7 game losing streak, while the other is still undefeated
Fire in Elm Grove. I can see it from Buemound in Brookfield.
It's no coincidence that man's best friend cannot talk. —Anonymous
god damn better believe we are
o man Jamarcus Russell just got officially named starter for the raiders. here comes another last place finish :(
like. WE GET IT. They both can take powers. One is good and one is bad. Blah blah blah.
Sitting in this class with
hey, DM me. We nd to talk
#Rooney Mara you look fab in white! I vote #Jessica Chastain best dressed! Bronze and gold Greek goddess oh my and a former LATW actress!!
Rugged Maniac Jax - CONQUERED! Outstanding!
Almost time for on #TheVoice. Great getting to see him show his skills every other week on TV
Awaiting the arrival of one of my faves....and DONUTS!
Which Academy Award-Winning Actress Is Seeing (Way Too Many) Stars? Sometimes the stars wear clothes, and sometimes the clothes wear star
When I tell someone something & they immediately start defending the person I'm talking about. Fuck sake, I was just telling you, calm down.
The school were you gotaaaa Watch your BACK .
#Bbworld11 Going over report card for past year.
question I didn't come across in your book. I have trouble moving seats to get position on fish because I think it (cont)
My hands feel sticky -_-
#ThankYouCody for always trying to make us happy and make our day better with funny instagrams and new songs or videos
I have really beautiful friends!!!
It's Migne 6.182 if you have online access at your school
Follow? c:
Chicks always complaining about not being able to find a good man.. Bitch lower your high ass standards then!
better than being at the mall or any store I'm sure
The first changes in the new, expanded Cumulus happen Monday... all the details hit your inbox soon in Monday's RAMP.
If this wind keeps up there's going to be a tree in my bedroom.. :(
Yes! We're talking vaccines tonight. Let's hear it!
that was great. Thanks for that. I'm going to add it to my list. :-)
No your not. :]
/// Every little thing is getting on my nerves right now.
take it easy there killer
Watching the world cup. Let's keep it going USA.
Thank you!
You rock! Hope you enjoy your first meal!
Tuesday #HCG Tip~In the 50s tuna wasnt allowed b/c it was packed in oil. Now water packed tuna is allowed & encourage fast #weightloss on P2
u falling up in there
Peach or Red Berry? hm
Wish I could say my absence yesterday was a #SOPA protest, but alas, it was only trying to analyze #Eliot's The Waste Land.
Predicting it will! Happy Birthday, Bora, thanks for bringing about so much high-quality life-enhancing science blogging
We'll get it done! See you soon!
Two days left for your state inspection! Check the date 2/12.
u wanna know what i remember?! asking u to stop tweeting depressing shxt abt us! y i gotta wake up every fckn morning seeing shxt like that?
Excellent, thank you! Hopefully I will be able to attend :D Thanks for putting this together!
“Romeo & Juliette are together in eternity; we could be like they are, baby take my hand.. Don’t fear the reaper.”
Heh, that's my ritzy name for me being an utter sloth.
Let me know if I can help: what are the boundaries of the district?
Lmfao. A coffee pitstop is absolutely necessary though. Otherwise I may not make it o_0
The Female audience continues to have a higher video completion rate at 74% versus 67% for Males.
sollyfeni StanCollymore hope you get reported you poor excuse for a liverpool fan Whats happened? Livepool fans used 2 b 1 of best about.
Happy belated Birthday!
We're tweeting live today with from the ediscovery CLE w/Judges Facciola, Grimm, and Peck in Charlotte NC #ediscovery ^BM
Happy about my single go crazy thanks to all my supporters and friends
i feel bad that i cant follow everyone back :(
yikes! perhaps you should get a new one, & give this one the...
Youre not being negative just brutally honest. Its awesome
that moment you're so PISSED huugee tearss jus fall from your eyess and it feels like someone PUNCHED you in your throat hard as they can!
just one RT if u are a belieber !
Stuck in the San Juan airport. Why is this happening so much recently when I fly?
Thank you so much! Glad you like it! Make sure to check out www.battleofthebands.com/morelikethemovies for our new single
I hate the following basketball players: Wade & Lebron! They some bitch motherfuckers for calling each other and teaming up.
#MLA meeting tonight. Tom Demont, president of #ALOA, speaking about how #ALOA is fighting locksmith scammers. Progress is being made!
Wanna do my homework?!
Diabetes is a pretty big deal -- with rising obesity it has become the epidemic of this century
Tonight @ BDW we have Giants vs New England and 12 wings and a drink for 9.00
Reserve your spot today for The Truffle Cheese Shops' 5th Annual Wknd "Get A-Whey" visit to the Ugly Goat Farm. $55-$65/pp
I hear it's Craft Beer Week....Celebrate it tonite at the Inn with a Shock Top or Laguintas IPA on draft while you watch the game!
Mike Tyson and Don King, part 2. It could happen. Our new blog is posted at www.ussportspages.com.
Hey Izzo would be perfect coach 4 Team USA. Like MK, universally respected. Great tourney coach, key w/ quick turnarounds.
Shut up, burps!
WE HAVE A CHOICE. IT'S NOT ABOUT BIRTH CONTROL. JOIN PRESIDENT OBAMA IN HIS FIGHT 4 BASIC FAIRNESS 4 ALL AMERICANS!
I miss u. And I dnt care who know cause its true and I wish I could have 1 more and I promise I'll get it right :D
This is weird:... Chemicals, n: Noxious substances from which modern foods are made. ~Author Unknown
He makes my ♥ skip a beat *6 more days till my birthday*
Cute friends.
hahah I was sitting in the sun in a tank top (x
RT Wow... Such a dope weekend spent in AC ! Dinner and TOO MUCH FUN #EpicSaturdays!
Novak would be the third best player on your nets roster RT : Steve Novak needs to relax
the power of man his version has like 10x more plays RT : nah thats the crazy thing lol. its :hat chopped btw
Going through new headshots - picking one is daunting!
Any other profession, I'd be fired. Good thing sucking is acceptable in my job.
just listeing to the hits raido they played one direction today
Got out of school early? FWM. =D haha
not tired. 👀 wide awake.
damn I wanted to watch it who won
So long joe, keep fighting the good fights.
Mondays should be canceled due to lack of interest. But, since we can't make that happen, come in and reward yourself with a drink tonight.
Why do people retweet such stupid, inane, pointless, and personal crap that has no bearing on any of your followers?
Polls closed Sunday and Monday in Broward County will open on Super Tuesday November 2nd 7:00am-7:00pm!
GOTTA STOP TRADING BASKETS.
11:11 #Make A Wish :T
I miss you.
I can barely get a word out now before it tries to finish my sentence
OMG 's ICON is so pretty!
#PFPayphone keep watching it, over and over again. YOU GUYS BETTER PLAY THIS ON THE SANCTUARY TOUR!!!!
Just stuff I remember. ha -brian
are you guys really broken up?
My dog gave me the only workout right now
Oh hahaha I was just retweeting
Don't go to bed angry! I really try to stick by this...talk it out, COMMUNICATE...stewing isn't going to fix it! :)
New beer menus arrived today. Know what that means? NEW BEERS! Lots of 'em. Watch this space, we'll update as we stock the coolers.
dammit, now I want yogurt
Last bu not least R breed in the booth finishing up
I credit for teaching me to put bread in the Tupperware container my cookies are in.
I guarantee half the "sluts" that y'all talk about aren't even sluts, you just hate that they get more attention than you from guys.
One more test
I ment for is to talk
if you are at #RecruitDC today, come find me :) I'm sitting on the ledge all the way in the back of the main room
I swear...I cant get a damn signal
She bought me a bracelet..awl
thank YOU was telling me yesterday how much they liked it.
lol okay. Wait. I don't get the joke...haha :)
If you ain't puttin' $$$ on it, you can't hit it!
As moms day comes to an end, I send some final love to my sisters who are all fabulous moms. <3
15 oz. would run you about $75
In this trife life. There ain't nobody you cam trust. It's called betrayal.
Thanks for the #ff :)
There is no "D" in Baylor
At your next lunch meeting impress your VIPs with a selection of our paninis, salads & Agua Fresca. Box lunches are so 2003. 619.255.2856
So does a league doing everything it can to remove head shots bring any sort of action against Brodeur after his comments?
you and need to come to soon! I'm not worried, can hold his own.
#20ThingsAboutMe #16: I was philosophical BEFORE facebook & twitter. lol
Good morning shugga, I'm going to sleep. :)
YES we call it mr. Cougar and it is HILARIOUS
Ooohhhhh see, it makes more sense in English.
what's is?
Man alive, what a week...
God i hate crying...bri
Hey Gang, the Chapel Hill plan review got approved!! The Countdown is on...who's excited for our newest location??
What? cookies? and you didn't share? , what's up with that?
Walked past a restaurant and it gave me a beautiful sense memory of my Afghanistan trip. That was nice and unexpected.
Money coming down path for #startups? Number of PE & #VC funds closed YTD at 70, almost 2X all of 2011.
What episode are you on?! lol I finished #6 this morning! lol #outtacontrol (:
Yesterday omar texted to jazmin papisit and today i texted daddyfun omfg our dumb typos
Scooter please can Justin Bieber come to poland? I love Justin Bieber so much.
wait so, if you thought what she tweeted that person was funny then why did she yell at you!?
March is a HUGE month for the B&O! Events for everyone! TGIF!
Ugh, gin. But yeah, you can spend a ton on scotch, too. Just like wine, though, you can find some good stuff cheapish
We think somewhere in between sick and #beastmode, but probably closer to
what is that. I want that.
Take it down & sell it on ebay!!!!
Just spent 20 mins waiting for service at beachwood! Asked bartenders twice for a server...wow what terrible service here!!!
thanks for hosting #cas360. Really cool space!
Today, I readjust my sights and aim even higher. I no longer see my path as difficult. I have the ability to soar. I am ready to receive.
wish the world would see Jesus for who He is and not what they've heard. Guess we'll have to show them!
Amnestying him wouldn't cost too much because teams would put in big bids and eat a ton of his salary.
What sort of animals make the best TV presenters ?Gnus - readers !
Plain water used for gargling daily helps to relieve #cold infections and soothe the throat. You can use it mixed with lemon, salt or honey.
Kid is presenting with two black eyes right now..
Monsters fans, your team needs you tonight. Come down to The Q, fan appreciation night, and a Monsters win gets them in the playoffs.
my dude was up? I been outta sync wit y'all we gotta link back up!
Stravinsky! RT ..then the UK in January; NYC in Septemeber(?); Seattle, Paris, Rome, Nashville, Toronto..& many more!
Hundred racks on the role it light up like a casino
wishful thinking is an understatement.
gearing up for sunny & super fun weekend ~ yay! Mighty Slim Pickins Saturday night at El Rio!
ty have a great weekend
Thanks for the #FF mention, Hugh.
Happyface! What type of green tea? Loose leaf or bagged?
: Thanks for the INCREDIBLE show last night!
KH architects show off adaptive reuse of gorgeous space as a library at RISD
So if you're a celebrity they don't haul your butt to jail when you owe this much in back taxes?? Ridiculous.
I'm gonna lose my mind! see what I did there haha I cannot wait when do you go and get the tickets n stuff
I wonder how many #followers I can get if if I tweet a lot more(: going to make it to 1 thousand before the end of January(:
when will you be casting in Chicago!?!?
Enjoy a free movie night! Here is a free Coupon code for a first night DVD rental at our GrabaDVD kiosks. (356937412) Valid thru May 31st
preparing for a history class - trickier than usual-50 minutes-U.S. using Midmanhattan pictures
Sometimes awkward people can be so much fun.
and you know this man! (smokey voice). So what's new wit you kid?
in my lowest point of my life, God is always my strength..
#DesireThursdays- I desire the most glorious-most outrageous, grounded, fiery, deep, sacred, gorgeous, illuminating mastery in history!
Bernie's? The other day Ben said it was a no go now.
Was your history teacher mean to you?
hope you made it.
excited to see you at the press club Monday. I'll be the one with the waving foam hand.
#thatawkwardmoment when you're #winning and the one who thought they were is
haha shhh.. We just did a show at this show choir comp so it's all of them lol
says the battery in my laptop is fully charged but the one in my brain has just shutdown!! goodnight peeps!!!!!!!!! Movie and Bedtime
CITYCENTRE is excited to announce that we have signed a new restaurant tenant!
I too also will be there as well, too. Let's party.
Hmm, I need to see The Raid just so I can yell at somebody.
back from camp , hows everyone doingg ?
going to bed wondering: how much wood would James Woods wood if James Woods would wood woods?
thanksforfollow let us know if we can also be of help -
When I have a meltdown bc there are no eggs & I already started making cookie dough? Gonna be a rough week. Giving up & going to bed early.
Thanks. I've looked at diigo a bit in the past but was good w/ delicious. Time to reexamine it. delicious changes :(
29 great beers on tap at new Wingharts location. two hearted ale
*autocorrect....:) Sorry! Thought it was a nickname for someone...wasn't sure who, but it was still funny. :) :)
Wow. I'm pretty sure I would've wet myself if that happened, lol.
My motto. RT : It's called the PAST, leave it there .
Hey thanks! We are excited, y'all should get a team and go Streaking next week in Nash!
I need the #kardashiancollection geoprint TriBeCa jumpsuit like yesterday #amazing times 10
Wilson's Monday night madness. Take Missouri +1.5 ncaab
yes he is and comes from a very similar background like our kids. It is through A program called Just Say Yes.
awesome thx for asking and yours?
Being deeply loved by someone gives you strength, while loving someone deeply gives you courage Lao Tzu
what's the song of the day?
Thanks so much for the re-tweets!
Only one more day until the 2nd ever SBC Challenge begins! We are thrilled to announce all of the contest prizes
up-and-coming band, Sherry Turkle and the Digital Dualists, confirmed for the #TtW13 afterparty
Living Lei Chic: HiFi Coop (HawaiiNewsNow) - Do you want to be a fashion designer, but don 't know where to start? Or maybe you just don
This fast life soon shatters; cause after all the lights and screams; nothing but my dreams matter
Today is my #someday will follow me? #neversaynever right? 5
Wow.... God your amazing!!!!
Opposite of my family. Guarantee my dad'll be serving me coffee mocha chip ice cream within 9 min of me walking through the door.
is acid reflux disease a sexually transmitted disease? if so, i caught it from my boyfriend.
Smoke Grin - Cannabis has a way of making you smile and so will this Smokin Grin t-shirt
:D Of course.
Has anyone herd the News Clhoe Kardashian is really not!,,,,!! herd that on Ricky Smiley morning show .....they all fd up
Burton J rules in GHSP Inc. v. AB Electronic Ltd. case involving a battle of forms between C and D's conditions: [2010] EWHC 1828 (Comm).
TRAFFIC update: WB Belt @ Gammon Rd. Semi rollover, blocking the left lane. Backups to John Nolen Dr.
Word of mouth is the No. 1 influencer of purchases & is the best invention in the history of commerce says
Happy birthday hunnie!
sad unpacking is the worst!!
Up next BG "Love Letters" columnist takes your questions on the trials & tribulations of The Singles. 1-877-301-8790
a little rough, but better than yesterday. I hope you had a good day as well.
I've been really tired lately :/
Don't you hate it when you buy a bag of packaged air, and there's chips inside it? Pisses me off!
I'm going to Wizarding World of Harry Potter for my first time Friday! Is it great?
Happy 4th of July, our U.S. office will be closed today. Have a safe and fun day!
WSJ's online voter guide gives me wrong information. Says I'm in ward 90, but I'm in 104.
: with Federer knocked out, this could be Djokovic's first championship. I call him in a final with Nadal, and winning.
Why are online job applications so difficult and long?! Garr!
Thank you for the feedback and additional tips! ^bw
No doubt, he messed Hammil up bad. What a night!
I know!!!! I love it
yessir I do! :) we should meet up. Its been a while!
No he didn't, but he also didn't lead with the crown of his helmet like these dummies do now. Tatum hit with power AND skill
U better follow me back helfa!
There should be a "i changed my mind button" after sending a text message
That revelation where as soon as my ex left, all my girlfriends and my family say he was ugly as f*ck anyway and we don't belong!
Almost a full moon and I'm feeling rambunctious! #DC watch out tonight!
you guys are incredible too! Seriously can't wait to book something with you guys!
Go to fatsickandnearlydead.com time to change our lives.....
omg Tiffany!!!
#YouKnowSheTheOne if you smile every time someone says her name
I think soo do you remember what they were fighting about?
World-Wide Human Geography Working Group on sharing spatial data.Highlighting as model for collaboration and usable tools
It's official Pat Kirch loves me.
It was so many ppl & so much love at my Dad's funeral. Hate it had to be for this reason, but glad he's no longer in pain. Love you Pops!
V interesting interview with this a.m. When he started writing abt lack of #womenintech, vitriol poured in.
those girls are to adorable!!!! i love them!!!
RT the links & info we post to share WayCool things w/everyone!
Where are you headed for the holidays!?
Always fun MT: Special thanks 2 IRS for notifying me of upcoming audit. Maybe next we can get together & schedule root canal
The Sega Genesis featured a version of the same Motorola processor that powered the original Apple Macintosh computer.
HE SORRY.
Thanks for the recommendation! Looking at his beautiful photos now
Exactly what I was hoping. I even told a friend tonight "I hate the pick unless we pick him"... I trust RAC....(cont)
Why am I not surprised?
Finally- a Bon iver song I like
#OneThingILove your smile :)
more east side open houses this Sunday, details TBA
Finally got a chance to read the newsletter. Wonderful articles and thanks for featuring me.
“: So NYRB jersey sighting not "random," but not expected or frequent.”
Traveling Circle tonight at Lit Lounge with Weird Owl and Brookly Raga Association www.myspace.com/travelingcircle
come by tomorrow morning, learn basic bike repair and enjoy a croissant, bagel and lox or your fav brunch beverage with some groovy folks
haha i read it...spoiler alert ;)...or is it??
I'm so scared. Totally scared.
Studying turned into playing baseball with basswood for an hour with
well, somebody needs to steel the bunny rabbit out of his hat!
Any good ideas for a poem come out of your "Fun" shopping adventure?
I forgot how funny #jerryspringer and #Maury were. 😄
How can you have "Jets" in ur twitter name and ur avi is a picture of Tebow in a Broncos jersey.
definitely or Phil Jackson
you mean Joan of Arc(senal)!
#first40songsonshuffle 38. Tears Don't Fall - Bullet For My Valentine :)
Great call tonight w/ my friend Richard- - check out his LIKE page on FB & follow him on twitter!
I hope someone saw that picture! It was a once in a lifetime opportunity!!!
#Simpletons . . . . im just tryna chill the fuck out
I need another handle. Wonder if is taken?
Oh dear, I think this is what they mean by being 'in the weeds'! So much to do! On the plus side, I don't have to brave Friday pm traffic!
It's a difficult place to be w/ "normal" college students, ppl in relationships and no one.
Main problem with GIS, Peter Bol reminds us, is that time is not included as an attribute of space.
Why when you need 13 yards do you pass it 3...
Raise a toast to St. Joe Strummer. I think he might have been our only decent teacher.
Who stopped?
oh so secretive...
Before I finish my homework, I'm going on a rant.
My parents don't let me go out,yet the house is fucking boring.
The tall guy in Lady Antebellum has a HOT wife!
Thanks for the follow, looking forward to learning more about your wines and olive oil!
===You were so awesome..HELL! What am I saying? You are awesome!!! You did that!
Lmao as I watch this video of and dancing. Yall better work.
RT : Keith Lockhart (BBC Musical Director) talks to Sean Rafferty about #StreetScene tomorrow - @ 4.30pm on
and scariest looking DJ award goes to..... (note he is a great DJ/Producer and this in no way speaks towards his music)
Hey there fellow Tweeters! Remember, to wrap those pipes for the winter! This will save you the possibility of a flood from broken pipes!
*delaney in her sleep* Laney- Hey... Did they redecorate? Me- what? Laney- shut up, Im not on my DS. :D
Me either!! Sounds like so much fun!
it's so wonderful that they are holding this festival in Gaza. thank you for the link. and looking forward to seeing you today!
my nights have been reduced to watching SATC re-runs and playing fetch with my dog. and eating oreos.
What a nice bath that was .
I'll be forever checking the mail everyday only to be disappointed because it's still not there yet.
Why do really good restaurants have such clean and nice restrooms?
At least maybe now it will be difficult to sell (legitimately)? *fingers crossed*
The JMF site is down due to gremlins. We're working on it!
wonderful designs!
The most important element of good lighting is the quality of light; its color, direction, and intensity.
Urban League of Greater Madison to provide FREE ACT Prep Classes and College Readiness Workshops
Following back
USGS: Strong 6.5-magnitude earthquake shakes central Chile
JC Penney offers $10 off $25 or more with code SPENDIT. Coupon may be used on Clearance as well as regularly-priced merchandise. jcpenny.com
My Netflix is possessed.
you look like an angel lol its true to :D
=/ idk, it will go to a post, but wont go to your page. im following u tho=)
is super excited for the Cactus Club Spelling Bee tonight. Drunk people trying to spell is going to awesome!
Happy First day of Fall! What are you eating today?
Tell me more about it. The problem is that I'm way over my head on books that need reviews...probably about 50 waiting -- no joke
Is this fa real did get a twitter?! Ah shucks it's over lol
...up super early.
my parents are going to kill Brian.
thanks for the RT!
I love the show ridiculousness(:
Love putting my headphones in and dreaming
I just read that too. laughing my ass off. They are run by idiots. The rest of the nfl is laughing at them as well.
I live in a very fucked up society
Copywriters need strong technical writing skills, and the ability to apply these skills whatever the task, medium or subject matter
After #7Daysofsex it looks like a hatchet wound
Thank you sir!
Unfortunately, Congressman Bilbray will not be in attendance at our Clairemont Congressional Forum. Peters and Saldaña are still confirmed.
Its suprisingly cold in south florida...weird
thanks emailing u now.
thanks, Roman! I don't think that text is online. It's worth finding, though.
Just blogging about home fire safety. . . To learn more, go to oklahomahomerepair.tumblr.com
lol!!! How did it happen?
RT > MSNBC just said more people have orbited the moon than have pitched a major league perfect game.
Man these refs are awful
New Year's Eve will never be the same. Here's to a lifetime of memories. RIP Dick Clark.
im unhappy bout more thingz than i can name -_-
We need to make sure to get #coderdojo elluminate link to so she can be part of the discussion!
Peanut butter no jam.
"Mum's reaction to d whole PM flag been taken off was "Those students are stupid".Seriously,control issue needs to be attend."
are you exited for #BOYFRIEND ? I am :) please follow me :) <3
Westlake people. Remember I was a trumpet player? Had to fill that role again during a session. Recalled why I did it all those years.
Thanks to everyone who watched the new episode! We saw on PHSTREAM that 1.000.000 viewers are watching! Thanks guys! We`ll follow some of u!
I'm gonna laugh when Paris Hilton is a fucking bomb ass DJ and all y'all are making fun of her, if she sucks then I'll still laugh 😂
Everyone, please share our bandpage! We have a $5 show at the Rock Room this Friday the 18th with Hartford and Speaker For The Dead!
let them hear your voice lady
Can't Please Everyone!
I just purchased Royskopp latest CD Junior it's really great. Yes it deserves five stars!
Alot of celebs are quiet about the #TrayvonMartin case....care more about march madness and other frivelous things
We will! Dinner for 10 squealy teenage girls at Pappasito's -- 15th birthday party. U have fun 2!
Mr zamboni is rocking out on the ice skating rink @ the NGA sculpture garden.
#mnwiId in three winning streaks this season longer than 2, have one more win than #CBJ and have 2 losses in past 3 games against #CBJ. Ouch
Sounds like an interesting idea for sure.
well if the rest of them would just stand still for a month at a time that might work! ;^)
haha good! It's a fun experience! No worrying necessary
Getting ready for Tampa trip, hanging out in Florida talking to migrants, refugees bout integration.
yay congrats you beautiful bitch! oxoxox
didn't win but still felt great I was nominated. I appreciate your support & votes. We'll get em next year :)
A "collective intelligence" approach to achieve more in life at www.IamINC.biz!!
Reds vs. Indians pre-season baseball. Countdown to the regular season has begun.
party this weekend ???
My cat yesterday walked on a drying prepped sheet, left paw prints and then tracked one on the piano. Was going to re-gesso then...
Going to enjoy the next couple of days.
wow...Julio Jones...just wow. Gonna have to rethink Colston and Bowe being locks I guess.
Unwrapped $30k in lights today. Very, very carefully.
-I'm loving the purple Robin! You are a wonderful inspiration to all women out there! You are beautiful.
Ladies, even if it really is a dress, but looks like a mans biz shirt, should u be wearing it in public???
#ThatsATurnOff when she is cheap ass hell & looks at you everytime to pay
RT : City of Milwaukee --- SENIOR WATER TREATMENT PLANT OPERATOR application period extended through TUESDAY, APRIL 10, 2012.
The Father is removing the links of bondage in every chain over the lives of the oppressed. Not a trace will be left behind.
Back in school days wen love was sweet and innocent...
yuck math! Haha I have Blevins too
I know more about reds but I recommend HiTime Wine Cellars. Give them your budget, they'll find 1.
welcome to the twitter world!! we'll be tweetin it up at #glazierclinics very soon!
Pride & Prejudice ** but love Catherine vs Isabella in Northanger Abbey. I see Isabella types in own life.
was about 2 cry, when she told me 2 stop waking 2 fast & I said I am a fast walker, it's like telling a whale not to swim
Did you know that our service is free of charge for copyright owners and can be terminated at any time and without notice of any period?!
Smith expressed great admiration for the Celtics team defense with Garnett as its leader, pronouncing, "He's got a lot left in the tank."
We found strep in a throat less place
Very happy to see Toby Kebbell's star on the rise. He's had my attention since "Dead Man's Shoes."
Really looking forward to the slides from the #mw2012 Tate metrics presentation! I don't know who to tweet, but let us know when they're up!
Thank you :)
Crowdfunding Pioneers Launch Professional Association in Concert with ... - MarketWatch (press release)
Keeping an eye on the latest on Bobby Petrino. CNN affils to cover a pro-Petrino rally scheduled at 8pET at the Broyles Center.
it's okay. Has not creeped into my top ten
I meant to LA
thanks so much! We've gotten some great entries! I am going to go take a look at your website. Happy Sunday to you!
thank you! I'm actually here most of the time, next trip stateside will be next year to launch 100 days to life.
Sum body gone try in bring beepers back lol
I'm pretty certain it's dirt.
yes! I'm going my first show in April called the Emerald Cup!
Yes! With no time to travel...
Congratulations Claudia Anaya and Joanne Kupidlowski, you both won an LA lunch with Thank you for donating to our ABC campaign!
Hey Whilly. How's it going?
Thx. One of our members did dislocate his shoulder 20 minutes before going on. A chiropractor in the chorus popped it back in.
THNX everyone for a great season! We're already looking forward to next year! WHat would you like to see in 2012??
did you tell then you have your own WHIP TOPPING to go on your coffee!!! If not u can cream me any time bro!!
trying to anyway. it's hard, not being a gamer and all...
we may be able to arrange that
Thanks for the RT!
Give John & Gus my BEST! Merry Christmas Sal!
Awesome to be back in great Twitter Community Stream! =D RT It's great having you back in the stream. : )
Don't forget Uncle fucker
You haven't lived until you've seized a beer vendor by the mullet.
Reading Brian Greene. Love his marvelous way of explaining physics.
see me for your Navigator!
YES! RT : A1 Sometimes collaborating means helping someone in biz you admire without knowing what the immediate return
“: think I'm about to go plank in my bed (: goodnight”
Shout out to our Secret Style Agents!
RT : Well, at least our moms think we're the best of the Twin Cities. #botc // Think again, boys.
# WWW.MENUOFMENUS.COM. Check it! It's a cross promotion with us.
I wish music had swear words in it. You have my Facebook info, right? Clearly, I'm not 8 years old.
well aren't u sweet?! And I are truly excited for u & ! ATL trip? I think so...
quality service, and cooperative attitude! RT "Last thoughts on creating trust with other vendors... #weddingmarketchat"
“: Well done sir. “: Mitt Romney was the inspiration for Papa Doc in 8 Mile. Barack Obama is Rabbit. " huh?
thanks for the follow!
ya it takes a little bit haha. I haven't watched Tosh's new season yet!! Is it good??
RT - But to my followers that kno football.. who do yal think gone beat new England patriots honestly ...
Gongrats to Kevin Morris of Miami and brother of Zach Morris. You got the $22 discount of the day! Way to be huge
#SF courts Warriors:
#idRatherHave Have The New Saconeys Than The New Jordans
The problem is not that there are problems. It's expecting otherwise & thinking that having problems is a problem. – T. Rubin
annual reviews?
i love you justin you know ? ♥
Haha! Thanks for the props!
haha yes! That kid is boss!
we'd love to help you out w/ your ecommerce system! Great for accepting donations!
go to the gym
Today's special: Tacoing Heads. It's a breakfast taco with a fried egg, zesty cheese blend, salsa, and green onion. 2 bucks.
I'm feeling good for the first time It's been a while since the last time
God morning!:D
Haven Source volunteer orientation on Sunday, October 16th at 11:30am. Email for more info.
Fan: "What's your name?" Niall: "Dave." #1DQuoteFans *Shouldn't she know his name since she's a 'fan'?!*
My client starting a soup and such
No, like an east-sider. Forgot there was stuff west of the river. Last time I lived in NYS & not in the city of Roc was 1996!
I want you in every way. I want you to be with me every single day. Happy Valentine’s Day.
Bedtime is the best time..
your kids will wash dishes when they have their own apartments (maybe)
Congratulations to Gotham Screen alumnus Tate Taylor on the twin Oscar nominations for 'The Help'. We'll keep our fingers crossed...
I'm so excited I don't know if I can sleep! Sounds like you are having a great time. Merry Christmas!
Happy Easter beautiful people! ☀🙏🙌😊❤👼🌸
Good ideas are not adopted automatically. They must be driven into practice with courageous patience
including watching him get burned for 5 touchdowns.
isn't there art & science in both lesson design and delivery?
Don't say you love me unless you really mean it. Because I might do something really crazy like believe it.
Seek what you want. Not what you don't. If you don't know what you want then you'll just be distracted by the things you don't.
Never hit a man with glasses. Hit him with a baseball bat. Lol
when i try to take a picture of my dog and he keeps moving <<<<<
I couldn't have put it any better.. I'm so frustrated with blazers.. And tonight is a joke also... Every game is a joke.. CHANGE!
No. Insanity is usually 40+ minutes. Not longer than an hour though.
It may be the nature of the institution. It begats an attitude of confrontation and competition. Move on, young librarian.
Great to connect with the Divas!
First time at Honeypie for brunch. The breakfast pork fries are a gamechanger.
yeah, happy hour is HUGE, after 9 pm, not much. there's always the 930 club, though i never made it there myself.
#ripvaclav: "Work for something because it is good, not just because it stands a chance to succeed." -- Vaclav Havel”
Ha! (LET's start a hashtag trend. Feel free to #wordstolike anytime! Fun.)
The JazzAvenger is at Jazz Standard about to catch Jason Moran's late set.
just showered about to walk to my brothers
Couldn't attend the Fulbright kickoff? Join the Office of Merit Awards for a small-group advising session tomorrow, 6-7pm, McKinley 155.
Congrats, Only His is a great book and I love the Fools Gold series.
Too much #noise in your neighborhood? Who ya gonna call? DOSE BUSTERS!
today I am #depleted. I have no energy whatsoever. it's crazy
take me with and drop me off in DC
The game layer on top of the world talk by Seth Priebatsch. At sxsw. He's 22 years old and dropped from princeton after his first year
Crossed the mighty Mississippi...officially in Iowa. Briefly.
share what you find as far as that playlist goes!
So I'm glad google's trying to go for a new look and all, but I keep mistaking the "important" button for the checkboxes in
It's amazing how the wildest chicks I knew growing up are now godsquad moms. Facebook is fascinating.
A friend of mine gave me some O'Doul's for my 21st birthday. It was disappointing.
2 zelwel dot com colorborations in the brewing- solo and gHOST project plus. :)))
what's the guys name and what's he look like? :)
please follow I love you<3(:
I love you . #Freehugs ♥
Relax, Comfort, Calmness i think yes!
now following
Excited about returning to my hometown for #mw2011. There's a warm soft pretzel from the Amish corner of Reading Terminal in my future.
as said on the newlywed game years ago "that would be in the butt, bob"
I got the same email! I guess I shouldn't have been surprised....
Villasana retains her belt after 3 rounds by judges decision.
The Brewers have started wearing ruby slippers.
Do you like my new name?Lol.c;<
Sandra Cook just proclaimed a National Teachers Day.
Bosh gotta go, love em to death, but he gotta go
thanks very much, great to have you!
just chillin like a villian on twitta. what bout you?
That's what being ridiculously awesome will do for you.
get some graham crackers + make ghetto s'mores!
Okayy and I Think Yes Im Going :D Lmao ;
. up next, a 2000 word story entitled "Don't you think it's time you called your mother..."
This weekend's movie pick -- "The Trip" with Steve Coogan -- has led me to plan a Labor Day Weekend road trip up to Bayfield.
Bye New York! The snow blizzard was fun but it's good to be back in 65degrees LA weather!
One time anniversary<3
Feeling great after a morning of
hope you get better
hope you are well Andrew!! Cheers blake
Carrie Underwood, Reba Mcentire, the Flaming Lips..Who's next? HOMAGROWN SHOWCASE TONIGHT -Presented by Stinson Entertainment & Spy Radio.
trying to figure out how to play best thing I never had on piano .. let's see how this turns out.
Either way sugar is sweet #goblue RT : Should be a good one.
The bbq was so fun yesterday I can't believe I pulled it together last min. Thanks to all that came I really enjoyed ya.
Awesome panel discussion at #sxsw When Filmmakers meet Interactive - the Canadians have our butts kicked here. Multi-Platform storytelling
#ufc surprised Diaz is a dog on this fight, should have laid cash but who knows he might be injured - gonna flip back and forth to boxing
Thank you for celebrating with us. Did you have a great time?
#WorstFeeling being judged ...
Meeting is ready to begin...
Merry Christmas from We close today @ 3pm & are closed Sat Dec 25. reopens on Sunday, Dec 26.
iOS and Android Engineers - Ratio is where the cool hang out. Come hang with us!!!
#Heartattack From the Couch to the Computer : A New Take on Therapy Title: From the Couch to the Computer : A New Take on Therapy Category:
if it is we're both weird. hahahaha
RT RT : If you make your past your present it will inevitably be your future.
thanks lady hope to see u @ ctlc
#bizforum It was nice teaming up with you and taking on
las vegas, Nevada, U.S.A :)
Sike. I wont judge though. Shit happens.
I know caitlin found it a while ago it was fucking great!
Oh how I miss the early days of Twitter! Times were so much simpler back in the day. Lol
yeah I'm okay(:
Oh no, I was trying to help you, but you wouldn't listen!
funny thing is my style improves daily for i learn everyday. cant judge a past of untold futures ;-) I will be the greatest. I see it too.
that made my stomach drop. I stopped checking my Yahoo (the designated junk account) for that very reason.
NO DCS IN OUR LEAGUE LMFAO
Didn't watch game, saw highlights. ManU has won 4 times in last 6 years and won game today too. Next season...
#Top100Lies "she's just a friend, you have nothing to worry about"
urs is one of the sickest ones on the globe!! :D
(realness of emergence vs. Process). I think I am ignorant. I don't understand emergence I guess. A link 2 help an fellow out???
of course
Well it had better be! Go HArd or gO HoMe!
RT : [MR] Happy Walnut-walking, Seniors #ClassOf2012!! #Graduation is just 4 days away!!
Accomplishment is not built on success. It's built on failure. it is built on disappointment. At times its built on catastrophe.
North Carolina Kansas is shaping up for an epic finish.
I just registered for the alumni bowling bash at in #PGH - looking forward to it!
i know what you mean lol. But these documents are for my law firm since we have a trial ;)
Bwahaha you are kidding right?
I watched a video of u singing on youtube, this morning. Magical, thats all i can say in words...
Time for pilates
I wonder can they train dogs to pick up their own shit...
"It's your reaction to adversity, not the adversity itself, that determines how your life's story will develop." ~Dieter F. Uchtdorf
ugggg I need some of that stat!
Tomorrow im rockin wit Bone Crusher boutta give yaw a Show!!..L's Up!
I can't wait for daylight savings. Warmer weather and longer days is where it's at!!!
watching napoleon dynamite!
"girl yes I'm pregnant but I still hit the club, in the middle of the floor no shoes wessup"!!! :D lmao Love the ratchet girl anthem! :)
~~~> lol... She on that dr. Jekyll and mr. Hyde shit.. must be
I have Verlander, Shields, Kershaw, Masterson, and Derek Holland in Fantasy. Can't buy a win this year don't have one yet.
We love you. But, we're not in the phone book under "agency." You have to look under "3 dipshits from Texas".
WE wouldn't have that problem but u tripping
Orlando People please repost
I see..now how does this make you feel?
smokin till i overdose
Friday, Friday, Friday.
Cathie and I just back from Rothbury,Mi., Music Festival -- Willie Nelson and Bob Dylan both on Sunday night !! Cool, or what? Yes, VERY
what are these? 👍🚌
Those reading this #Timeline are in the Know. They find the links within links. Have you? - oxox
what type of name would you give the bad gay ppl?
It's like the time I wore a white blouse to work and my boss says, "You look like you're getting married." I am never getting laid again.
A good motto to follow in Sales is SWSWSW. Some Will, Some Won't, So What!
They want me to be weird... I'm gonna give them weird!! ;)
that happens to me all the time... I would just like to catch up on my "to-read" stack and things keep getting added to it!
lmao when I saw it, it reminded me of you ! Cause you were the first one to tell me what ratchet meant &im like wth?lol d:
Last night in the city with my Chenyaa !
RT : The undergraduate film festival is tonight in from 8-10 PM! Don't miss Your Take, #BU!
hated Christmas! The whole Christmas season! Now, please don't ask why
She really gone.I'm Finna get hella drunk fuck it
just doesn't 2 hrs carrying EVERYTHING up from our basement
Ghetto Dennys time on the company dime.
I am hoping they have. Going from SUV to car so excited about better gas mileage.
i fully stuffed my grill with good leftovers from my wonderful womens birthday yesterday and now i'm rockin some decent gas. i'm full though
do yourself a favor and watch now. You'll learn a lot, like how to properly pine after people, etc...
#69Factsaboutme 12. I always bite my nails off. I don't like them long.
what is it you say...hm...bwahahahaha..#niceone!!
Summer? Is that you?
you have a point... next time I might try to endure the sight long enough to snap one
oh man have we been there! Love that ferry ride and it's a perfect day for it.
It's at my friends place. They live 5 blocks from me. They are supplying grilling meats and I'm bringing booze. It's a party!!
nuggets aren't meant for sharing!
Honey, I shoulda been done with you a long time ago. Gots me a REAL friend ;)
Invites to our 2 contest will be comng soon - Free laptop, and Fre Pro Video Camera! www.workforbooks.com pls RT
Man I haven't been on twitter in the longest.
but i cant complain
thanks - always good to know what others do
WE HAVE A SPECIAL EVENT IN APRIL, 2012 "FEMALE LAWYERS FOR OBAMA IN SEWALL'S PT, FLORIDA. YOU & FAMILY ARE INVITED
No way. He's been charging it for years.
Pretty damned great weekend, you guys. Let's say we do it again soon?
Alright! Do you live in California?
i love his eyes <3
Good decision! <3 anyways I'm sure he'll go to London. :(
Ghostfinger tonight! Someone come hang with me
having Settebello for lunch m
I remember when Elliot Smith died and everyone was all "hey what about the troops huh!?!"
Austin Aries made Bully Ray tap out. Awesome match. Crazy bump by Aries.
Just got hoed cuz it wasn't as many songs as it said :(
A good night's sleep fixes everything. Windows open, tunes on, lights out.
Middlebrooks is really strong.......
The raisin cookies that appear to be chocolate chip cookies are the reason I have trust issues.
(bryan) RT: : ...Why is swineflu getting such traction? Because it's a disease with a BRAND.
Idk y girls be so rude. I'm like the nicest mf
sounding rockets ...Nathan's fav. Wish he were up to watch :(
wow! has winter hit!!! time for some gingerbread spice hot herbal tea to warm the insides!
Bermuda born but im an American Cannibal
Thank you! I try to serve - I'm glad you think that's amazing ;-) RT #FF to because he's amazing :)
Some nights all your teams win 😃 but still some nights they all lose 😔
I think is like.. Mad at me :( I haven't got a reply on my last 3 tweets to him. <|3
I passed my stats class
you're gonna say bad D n give rivers no credit. We know we know...... #ComeOnSkip the bad guy role is getting old.
Welcome to the St. John's family! RT : Just received my acceptance letter to St. Johns University. How exciting!
Babysitting my fake baby and finding new music. This is not so bad.
you need to lollx
I'm more of a smoker lol cheers to that!
Who is taking the next 12 months to train seriously for their first #CrossFit Games experience? I know I want to be on a team for regionals!
Wonderful production and amazing performance of #Rinaldo, but for God's sake, would someone please unplug the smoke machine!
Representing at the Relato Digital Storytelling conference in Valencia this week!
APRIL 7 come to 's Day In The Park 2pm -5pm w etc...
you on the list for mixes for sure.
Disney has written me into another episode of Austin & Ally! Film next week! Here we go December...
Have a good weekend being #timeshare free and respond for next weeks transfer
Ron Artest: "I think we did OK". Yeah, OK for a 29-point drilling
I didn't even get the practice questions right... #eoct #ithinkifailed 😁😳😢😨
odd-hour birds
making a donut run 4 jenni! First one of this pregnancy.
revving up to produce another film
Good Morning doe!
I just sprayed mosquito repellent on a mosquito. Now he'll never have any friends.
Tell those cool #TEDsters to say hello on Twitter. Big fan here. I think I've personally watched over 300
...and she blushed.
He actually wants a slightly useful education...something he won't find at Kentucky...
"I never had a bad day in my life" -R.Gray
yea baby
I kind of want some damn rice
No such thing. #Siracha “: #waytoomuchroostersauce.... #noodles”
I hope so! I want to start a franchise
That's an idea. How far is the drive? 2-3 hrs?
My pockets on full and so is my gas tank.
solid pick up.
You got it!
Book your cut and color with Tarah McPherson owner/stylist of Salon La Bonne Vie before the holiday! Scheduling will book up fast!
haha, sorry about that, I'm a little to young to get that one!
I feel horrible. I'm going to bed.
Welcome to Twitter!
when I hear "Dow" I think Dow Day (1967 anti war protest gone bad). But, then again, I'm in Madison, wi.
Tip 3: Wealth - Wealth isn't something that is necessarily within the reach of most but the perception of wealth is.
pregnant WHAT!! omg! #startingrumors ;)
tequila, preferably in a blended margarita with lots of lime and salt
Exactly. 2 loses would even be a disappointment in my eyes.
FLAWLESS. YOU ARE ALL FLAWLESS
will be at this year's Digital East 2011: www.digitaleast.com
We don't get to hear this really good quote? Come ON.
It's a great combo! RT : Another victory using Read and React and Amazing what happens when kids buy in.
Unplug from the social media mothership for a few days. Trust me, you'll be fine.
omg I was gonna have a heart attack lol. she looks beautiful as usual
I think they sense that, because they just love to swoop at me.
I'm late but thank you. we lost one & won a game today.
Just read the tweets and keep it moving. Stop over analyzing my thoughts.
Representin' at the gov video solutions forum at the #Newseum with #wifi :)
where r u ?
Not weird at all. I too struggle with wanting a warmer place. I have several color combos in mind too, just can't decide.
Writing sesh with
How're things with you?
word. should be ah-PEETZ!
I scheduled a trip on the Vikings-Dallas game day? What a screw up.......
not much just working at a Dayy Care & having funn w/my life =) wher yu working at???What skool yu @??
1st time and loved it for SOUP event! Will def go back to the garden and more community events :)
got my invite from Powers, but figured discussion was needed
RT : RT : Tyshawn Taylor has been suspended for a violation of team rules, per KU release.
Watching interact with & team about #cyberbullying & respect.
its snowing in fucking april god must be coming back soon
Find BL CD's @ Paul's (Bloomfield), Dave's Music Mine (s. side), @ myspace.com/betweenliberties via paypal. Get yours now - This limited ...
I do not want to go to school tomorrow at all.
fam none of them can mess with BIGGIE...just SAYIN!!!
R.I.P. Mr Adam Yauch.
I never said no. Lol. But I think i'm going to Louisville.
I hope the Eagles pick up a good receiver this year
This is a must see for sure. Please tell me you're youtubing it for us sad souls that can't join u there. ;-)
OD Hot In Here -.-
Damn poor guy on 104.3!
I feel ya! My nuggs r struggling without ne injuries!
How could she invite you if you live in chula vista think corinna -.-
thanks I know this festival is just awesome. You guys have to come here one year. 54th yr
Making pizza👍❤
Who will save us from the Tea Party.
Just Dance at Bottoms Up! Go GaGa!
Dear ABC gods, please bring back GCB.
You're sick when the tops of your ears are cold & your toes are hot.
"Make a decision to be happy, and stick with it."
true! RT : A teacher asked a ? re gerunds; we decided if she could get through life w/out knowing, Ss didn't need 2 know.
fa la la la la la la la la
Measuring by engagement influence and action helped demonstrate the value of the B2B SM initiative
Whitney......very very sad....long time fan.....NOT SHOCKED HOWEVER OF THE NEWS........so many have followed the same fate......SAD!
i want a long sentimental text message. just because.
Oh not you and Instagram too...
Surprise visit from Amber for some Starbucks...mhmm can't say no to that ;)
Great BD fun at Artist for a Day and Le Bistro du Beaujolais withh my family. Never fails to entertain.
Fountain Hills Town Council meeting Thursday 6:30PM. Should community move to a single trash & recycling hauler?
RT : Didn't get a chance 2 see U after the set with Rez in Jazz Standard, just wanna tell u that it was a great show!
they hurt the worst really bad
I'm not a fucking role model.
sorry...Why don't you brag about it. Lol
Watching early Radiohead concert, so rad
i never thought i would ever say things like that to my dad. i completely EXPLODED & let all my anger out..
peace and light
north korea's lost it.
Nice polish!
Just woke up with ma fur on and no recollection of last night....keepers you're a bad habit that I can't quit
My view is... You only get a Hangover when you STOP drinking. Therefore the solution is quite simple ;)
Me and my frnds gnna crash this dudes 's Party 2 mrrw! We gone be some party crashers
608 tonight. First time I have graced the front entrance of a church in years.
i love jb
#Fitness For a healthy high protein snack, try Greek Yogurt, it has 14g of protein and tastes great
Us strong Women will bounce back after we've fallin down, cried our tears, & faced many hurts.
Thank you for the mention!
I'm following you on keek and I'm subscribed to you too<3
: Link on Panetta?
You and I both know that might not last lol jk
Really I only flirt with the rage. I'm a hairless monkey spinning on a watery rock. Tomorrow I'll do pushups to keep the chimp at bay.
Coyote Ugly New Orleans for the Win! Let's get Ugly!
walking across mass ave to the Berklee building
<derailed>The #Cain Train</derailed>
About ready to watch LSU lose!
Scared me when he said NAP haha thats my initials haha! :)
Busy week planned, but it's all good!
I like cake.
#IfWeWereTogetherRightNow I still think my iPad would be more entertaining.
Booty work!
it was so awesome, greatest movie ive seen in my 25 years of life!!
If my radio every left my I would most definatly cry...
Dinner, lemon cake and whiskey. "Role Models." Night night. It's been a "short" long weekend. Gotta have energy to decorate tomorrow. *muah*
asked how to spell "Whatever"
Thanks! “: = Eager to watch the #MayweatherCotto fight? Check out #boxeo”
Thanks Community. Now I want to watch Blade. And that movie isn't even that good. The sequel's pretty sweet though.
i dont think she understands the sacrifices that i made
For the fist time the outer world was perfectly attuned to the world within; it was a joy to be alive.
Can't wait to see Super Moon tomorrow night!!! Last one was in 1993; 18 years ago!!! Good night
And he could be a shady lawyer trying to get big, but I'll give him the benefit of the doubt on that one. ; )
Oh I just can't wait to be KING
new followers @ for a follow back
Just threw my Burger King wrappers in the Mc Donald's trash can #thinkicare!?
In honor of Mothers Day, #makemomproudtoday!
My wife would love dining in Atlanta. Every restaurant has Coca Cola on tap! :-)
We live a generation of not veing inlove :/
Take an additional 15% off of ALL deals under $500 for today only! Use the promo code CYBER to get this incredible savings!
We are who we are until the day we die
if you move to Santa Monica you will have to change that....LA people don't like attitude or aggression OR confrontation.
Less than 30 minutes till i'm off! Hurray mothafuckaaaaaas i'm gunna survive another day! lmao
Thanks for following, I followed back. I'm working on funding, thanks.
humility is our acceptance of ourselves ...www.soberlivinghouston.com
and I have contemplated that since you have free time now, YOU BEST BE READING SOME NAMAZ AND QU'RAN. :)
#EpicPhoto RT I want to lay in a room full of rose petals one day...
I'm sure you're going to get a bunch of bawdy suggestions, so here's mine--play Chutes and Ladders and make milkshakes.
I feel like im gunna puke:x
Happy Mother's Day to all the mothers reading this. And I wish you happy memories of your own mothers, too. www.lindaswift.net
you've got it don't even worry! Did you stay up late?
i t can only be in 2 places cause I only sat down in 2 places today, but yellow shirts won't let me back in
One of my favorite bands has reformed...The Stone Roses... Cheers!!!!
Sitting in the porch thinking..
Come by and learn more about the Aviation Technology Center at the Red Kettle Cookout on Monument Circle today!
i really want my hips pierced c:
Thanks Linda! Glad you're feeling better :)
Who's shopping handmade this year? ::raises hand::
& wreckin' time! #CantWait! #BeatIndy “: Bosh: "This season has to be extended for me to play again."”
I just said what women want.... it begins with the letter s and ends with the letter x lol jk jk
RT : Typing "?" in Gmail (when not in a input field) gives you a cheat sheet of all available key commands. Who knew?
"Do what you love in service of people who love what you do" ~
Omg I have NO clothes or supplies for college.
Look up dor vs bolten and educate yourself on the subject,
I can't even express how ridiculously dope your beats are yo...
My bro knows him, were on EFF board together. His work is fascinating, outside my expertise, but worth struggling through.
the episode tonight was awesome it made my night so funny and awesome performance.P.S. Zayn was so hot!
Thank you for the RTs :)
how did the exam go?
Don't worry about the people in your past,there is a reason they didnt make it to your future
#directionerproblems when you have to explain how the boys are gay, but they are.
An educated people can be easily governed
kiss my ass
Diving into coding up the sound design GUI for the VST Instrument.
TONIGHT - DJ's J-Roc & Justin George Play the Hottest Hip Hop, EDM & Dance Music along with The Lotus Dance Team @ ABQ's Best Danceclub!!
I know right
Finished writing another song for the EP titled "Blackout" I am so excited! Stay tune for more info!
I hear ya. Sucks. How you been?
Wow, is Tiger Woods the new John Daley? Quits when he's having a bad round, WTH?
Thank you :) RT : the new album is sick!!
About time they called it.
Had meatloaf for lunch since last night's veggie dinner resulted in a dream best described as half Chronicle of Narnia, half Deliverance.
Cant wait! hope all the verses get done 100% today, so i can start to mix and master theses tracks!
u and don't know what a dogfight is!!
Tue Morn: feeling refreshed.........
if you are the owner of please contact Isaac Shmaschemov at 774-277-9202. i would like to manage your internet everything
Some girls making fun of me. Oh tonight will be great.
Why not?RT : Didn't go to the Louisville game today! Waist of a ticket! Smh
i have no intrest for its good in all that they pay for schooling or whatever but thats something i dont wanna do
Action is the antidote to despair.
Family Guy
If there were 28hrs in the day, it would help me a lot.
maybe . Sam might be comin ova after her graduation though
After watching a large portion of Nuggets/Lakers, my anti-NBA position is strengthened. The level of play is obviously higher, but...
the way they've been handling online releases and sales have frustrated me to the point to where I just may stop collecting
awesome like always!
Hey, you don't have to or anything, but if you want to, feel free to nominate me for a Pushcart Prize.
My taste in music varies greatly
We're deep in 2012, and yet many of the best type foundries still expect us to use sIFR. That went out with IE6 and cufon.
The end is just a new beginning.
how does she stalk him?
Super Bowl was awesome you guys! I hope you enjoyed the 2 for 1 hot wings!
r u jealous that i won the ultimate prize of my own doodoo in a light truffle sauce.....
RT : EdVillage is thrilled to be a partner of Together, we will transform education practice in South Africa!
you mean redemption lmao
mama taught me well!! 🎉
party of 5th ave is just crushing the burgh, i have grandmas asking me to play it
I'm not blind anymore.
It's sometimes hard to fight the negativities of people who don't believe you are destined to do great things. U R appreciated.
Oh they playing Yeah3x in this restaraunt(:
No, I'm doing distributed configuration in a secure environment. I need to manually configure and edit various IIS MMC knobs
.. bladder, seminal vesicles, prostate or urethra, intense burning immediately following ejaculation may occur.
You are a gift to the world, a divine work of art, signed by God. you haven't changed one bit<3
Every day for almost a year I've gone to sleep and woken up with the same thing on my mind. How to live with regret.
Bruises on bruises on bruises
you're right x) I'd lock you outside.
Watching the fashion show rehearsal . . . Woo hooooooo. Big floral headpieces are so hot right now.
Hello Glen, how are you?
I MISS YOU TOO..LOL
Listening to explain baseball to me and I only wish was here to listen to his logic
any actual living and breathing continental philosopher and not a cross-dressing ordinary sort. aka analytic
please follow, i'd love u forever if u did! ??
i get mad every our. at least twice.
how was the shoot?
“Differences of habit and language are nothing at all if our aims are identical and our hearts are open.” ~Albus Dumbledore
Cincy xavier rematch would be awesome
With my old friends. Nice.
Much appreciated, Helen. TY!
Long week. Spinning a private event tonight. Back in Hollywood next week.
And buying stupid things lol
ill have to try that!!
Worth a shot. Baron's got good size. He can create for himself and others. I'd like to see how he'd play w/o the ball.
#lgovsm maybe but sometimes personal feels riskier than hiding behind corporate identity Need to be open to some risk
Strange bed fellows MT NC amendment to block same-sex marriage was passed by coalition of conservatives and black voters
Happy New Year to all our friends and followers. Thanks for making the last 12 months so amazing & we hope your new year is bright!!
Accepting changes to first 13k words, edits by an old journalism friend, mostly misuse of commas, dashes, etc. #androidjesus thanks stacey!
We give away FREE Concert, Festival, Movie and Special Event Tickets. Submit your show, maybe it will be featured!
M. Good question RT: Museum fans!: what is one new thing you learned from a museum via social media? Reply w/
“: #ThatOnePersonWho you always think about”
if ur confused in algebra 1, wait for geometry... It will get worse, except algebra 2
The drawing for the California Mega Lotto is $540 million tonight! What good deeds would you do with your money if you won?
RT : We should totally bring out our FA Cup and do laps around the stadium if we lose this.
Can't wait to delve into the 2nd #HungerGames book.
Most teenagers go out and party, but i sit home at night and tweet (;
off to Amman, Jordan!
Omg creeper alert!!! o.O
This is like when Tyson got out of prison to fight McNeely...if Tyson was a slightly retarded white guy.
Wife got her hairs cut. Looks snazzy.
Want to bring some to Millgate?
Thanks-> for reaching out. My last visit was to Bahia. Definitely do not like Nega Maluca. Good to read ur take on it.
I think it may be about time for some beer and Galaga...
Hi #libchat I'm Allison a library supervisor at USC
Larry Bird. Even though he wasnt the flashiest guy, he ALWAYS got it done
You're welcome Erin! I miss our talks! Tweet me sometime! :)
Prepping for another Master Class Intensive tomorrow morning. Looking forward to meeting new talent!
What makes a good teacher, in your opinion?
i hate it when u textin ppl nd at the same time tlkin to some one nd type wat u was tlkin bout >.<-____-
Avg patent wait time is 34 months + going down. Startups that qualify for fast-track option wait as little as 12 months. Good for innovation
i don't have my phone with me, but it's 615-818-6084
are you sure you get it? do you? ya- a bit drawn out, easy go to line when busy though, lol.
It depends on the height from which you jump.
Tonight's Foreign Film - VITUS (Swiss, 2006) at 7:30pm. This is one of the better films I've seen in the last few years...Don't miss it!
So this hoe , outta nowhere she messages me telling me to go over -.- WTF? I don't even know you. And i'm taken <3 bye! ^.^t
ATLANTIC SALMON eggplant puree, seared greens, feta and sundried tomato dressing
I say that daily. "Better have my mon-nay. My pimp hand is strong!"
yeah I think I watch too much American television lol
see ya later!
Nora, if you keep clicking, through you get to the cake... it looks delicious!
I'm sexy and I know it
so long have a good summer you will be missed
will you come to Hong Kong?Hong Kong selenators will wait for you!!!
Time to break away from Twitter to work on #poem and post revisions
Does tambourine count? cc
Does the star Sacha Baron Cohen?
I am not familiar!! Smh! Who said they was they Lying
RT : It has never been so easy to earn a living as a poet in the U.S. as it is today. Dana Gioia
#YouGettinPunchedIf you touch my food.
Well someone needed to go. Hatcher had been on the hot seat at times for years. Thx to him for his work for the Angels. JD is in charge now
The shortest way between two points is the one that goes through the stars." - Jose Antonio, The Poetic Imperative
who was the first girl to run off the stage on maury that cause every single girl to do the same ?
Merry Christmas!
Evernote (and a lot of other note apps) seem to really be a place to dump a million things you'll never look at again.
love her #greattalk (:
That was special.
Tired, hungry, and ready for bed. but guess what... i have homework. two 2 page reports and a presentation. I hope Culinary school is easier
i know that also she said do u have a gf
Man oddii was fired up damn took a lot of guts I think I see those getting watery then they went back goodjob
#x24 Mexico. Hot wash starting w Mike Fernandez leading-Google+ w NORTHCOM & GlobalBordersCollege & Mex City-how 2 improve disaster response
our 2011 fundraising calendar is done and we can't wait to show you all what we have in store at Right Direction!
RT damaging your teeth every night, over and over.
Serious fun at the conspirator mtg this morning. We predict: a banner year for the dogs and the ponies.
well since you don't have one now you'll be able to get one when you go back. Because you haven't seen everyone this summer
oh yeah - it was awesome
Ok so - 15s beat 2 "Nike" teams to win it all. That's with no Austin Burnette - our Lamar Odom. Great Job guys.
no lol I think he does some crowd walking but its supposed to be chill and laid back
Have developed disturbing new symptoms... Scary. Will see doctor on Monday, hopefully.
don't discount the green with the cream wheels
So no iced coffee today -too cold- but we do have mixed berry pies. Ne 42nd ave and killingsworth
#fashion #blogger ladies! interested in being in a reality show? send me ur email!
I worked HARD to be a part of the elite. I pushed the "follow" button on your profile.
miss reading my monthly
Two words come to mind that aren't necessarily that bad separated, but combined, they are hideous..I speak of "toe jam".
I hate giving good people bad news. Hate it.
Morning Elsie. Thank you for the prayers! Thats so sweet. And you are very welcome. :) Praying your week is hugely blessed as well
If you are going to #HIMSS in Vegas, ZirMed would love to show you our new automation tool for payer payments & our patient
RT I will follow and shout out the first 50 ppl to retweet this.
The House! This is the worst day of my life...
how come you were icing your knee a couple of days ago?!
Super excited to see next week at aiga! Amazing #infographics !
shutup stop complaining
DESIGN you want to have a desk that feels comfortable for both users and staff
Whoa, I forgot all about Annihilation Time. This really brings me back.
“ Cosmic bowling use to be the shit,then we all turned 21”i just went not to long ago lol
You'd Better Believe It.
sitting below you. Not wearing a hat at all.
Did you rage in the Sahara tent?
what u sipping on?
hey front row amy. Why is that seat next too you always empty? Do you have a bf lol.
you coming to the SOLID crawfish boil this afternoon?
Audience Q: Have any of Judy Garland's family seen the show? #SUinNYCTheater cast members don't believe they have
Pedi and mani tomorrow YAY I can't wait!
Happy to be here! #GoReds ": Tonight's crowd will be the second-largest non-Opening Day crowd in #GABP history (regular season)."
I feel like if ur a local artist u should always be humble cus ur not makin big money u tryin too till ur known outside ur state stay humble
so just thought you should know it is one hour before you hafta wake up..and i'm just now getting in bed ;)
You can count on it. Plenty of Frog madness and Sandbar action that weekend.
E-mail me at nhusain14[at]gmail, if you have more questions. I went through a LOT of pro-con lists.
Testing Twitter API
just did your survey ...interesting
When Hockey players don't make it as pros they just become professional punching bags at the local youth boxing club.
:) lol Thanks x
Ladies we are in highschool... GROW THE FCK UP!
"People who make progress every day toward something they care about report being satisfied and fulfilled."
"The responsibility of those who are free is to free somebody else."
Hey we are now doing private Streaks as team-building exercises! let us customize a Streak for your company! email us
Prereqs are for pussies! Just let me stay in the stupid class, Sac City...or I'll hunt you down and hurt you like Liam Neeson did in Taken!
Playing the Uptown in Westmont, IL with Pistol Pete. Tonight.
Things are going to get better, just gotta try and pray for the best.
Nice call!
Thank you!
There is a yoga class 5/20 at 6:30 AM at the same time as the YBP Health Walk.
If you don't want drama, then don't start it. Things are only as complicated as you make them.
I'll be in the mix tonight @ the Hangar(8203 broadway) inside the loop. Crazy drink specials all night. Party starts at 10
maybe. I'll be on the wife's bike.
From the hood book of #2Chainz Okay now Nicki Nicki Nicki, put it in your kidney. Got a new LS 450, ain't no keys in this do-hicky.
Have you been getting messages like "someone is saying bad things about you?" It's a spam thing. DON'T open the attached link!
Take my hand, close your eyes With you right here, I'm a rocketeer Let's fly
I want food .
Perfect weather <3 Only time I can say I love florida.
Hope you're bringing some Pittsburgh flavor to your new home!
So and I are thinking: Maybe this game will end with same score as the Tigs game last night, 15-5. How bizarre that would be.
women being bitchy
Just met the new managers at
About to make me some fried pickles, :)
Looks great.
I Love You too big brother lol❤
plum upside down cake rocked our Seder and my gluten-free vegan world, equally
get a skort! I'm sure those are banned for purely aesthetic reasons.
Second to none.
So many typos in books published these days. So true. Great question. Is electronic publishing the cause?
The surprise twist in the "agent hiring a hooker to lure athletes story" was that it was a BASEBALL agent who did it.
I like that all the people suspicious of Barack Obama's weird name are having to choose between Mitt and Newt. TP via
“: here ;)” Awww you knew I was talking about you ;)
#DCtech parting (reluctantly) with tonight at for her career at ! and #DCevents won't be the same.
On the face of it, yes. But "Jersey pride" is far more common, and therefore more irritating, than Baltimore pride.
"Our image is all about freedom. Getting high. Having a good time. It's like a big party." -Rick James, San Bernardino Sun (July, 1981)
My vote for the MBP. But then, I work from home a lot (and that's usually when I need the most computing power).
hope your tux has expandable panels for "taco expansion"
Taj with the SLAM !
Thanks, man. I definitely wanted to make the switch from company to consultant with this one. Testing the mere exposure effect.
Happy Cinco de
Great meeting you and hanging out tonight at
Thanks, man. By the way, was shocked to see that your little boy's beard has been so slow to come in.
watching pawn shop on history good show
Spain? Oh, Wow! I'm sure it's "virtually" possible. My fingers are crossed too!
now let me see it ima sight see'a
its June 22nd the actual concert and the tickets go on sale this saturday at noon
make no sense, right? but, bball: 'cos coaches (think 80s pat riley) set bar there. baseball: 'cos it's old-ass tradition.
Hi guys!! if you followed today- repost about #mofones!! This is a totally #artist run project and we need help spreading the word!! Thanks!
love how we coordinate outfits... Even today we are both rockin taupe. You look gorgeous!
Girl! You are havin a weekend !
That song makes me want to slow dance.
Need to find a rental company that will rent cars to 20 try olds -____-
I COULD NOT POSSIBLY AGREE WITH YOU MORE RE: THE FACE PUNCHING
finals start tomorrow! :-)
I feel like everyone I know has or is making a trip to Hawaii this year! Great for their tourism.
Well I am drunk 😁
huh??? Where??? What u talkinbout Willis?
Thanks Ben. Glad to see another success! Working hard to stay positive and not wear myself out this week.
thanks for checkin out last night at !
hi there!! You should get a profile pic, otherwise people will think your twitter page is fake/spam. Just trying to help ya :)
Sign of the times: I saw a pic from boxing match and thought it was a still image from a video game.
I like the greenmoms
Yeah I find that my best friend is cooler than E.T cause he's ugly and she isn't and E.T is a bit scary :S :D<33
Salsa Mukluks now in stock! These babies got tires which must be seen to be believed! Curbs are no obstacle! It's like riding on the moon!
i really want to know what time does the ps3 demo come out for north america, please reply as soon as you can!? :/ thanks
I feel I can't do that lol my co-workers follow me
How romantic and perfect would it be if I went to a concert or speech with my lovely bitch omg, I would die ♥.
Follow back pls ♥
hello Sierra! How r u???
They conversation dont have shit to do with you
Thank you Troy!
Ah its soo nice outside! ♥
lololol black clouds.
Lol just cause you smoke, ppl always think you some big weed conecc or sum? Haha hell naw!
hi hi
Can I print one out online & bring it in?
I Sense Fuckery On Twitter
Tiesto Sunday! You wont want to miss that!
No week like "Fight Week", 5 SHORT days until #MayweatherCotto on
Teaching Danielewski's Only Revolutions in New Media, New Modernisms today. Still not even sure if I like it.
For me, moving is the absolute pits when it comes to the military life.
hey austin if u didnt know i check ur twitter page every second of the day rt mention or follow me back love you <3
thanks girl! I am entering the working world today! So excited for what is to come!
#MFL in the Building! Club G5 next time u in that motha fucka ask DJ Fat Boy to Drop That Bad Bad Bitch!
Worried bout ya followers you need to get ya dollars up
Hey Lil Bro, thanks for the follow.
Have fun!
is this the real Bailey from RNG or a fake account?(:
What is a hurricane's favorite pet?-Anywhere from 1 to 5 cats
the (political) grammar of apologies "mistakes were made by .... me" #ConservatismMeansNeverHavingToSayYouAreSorry via
You think Kennedy can handle the first draft of the release tomorrow, or am I pushing my luck?
I'll see you for breakfast!
I got a ps3 but more people have xbox so prolly xbox will be the main winners console.
Alright (: good night
Freakin' Pothead ;D No For Real We Have To Smoke A Bowl Together..♥
hahaha, I am confident you realize this Gazelle will not be getting chased down by any such lion after recovery ; p
haha lucky:) mine started about 2 weeks ago
The college professors and other goo-goo types never liked Your Mayor, but I was always a man of the people!
why cant you ?
I learned whn u a gud person the devil send his wrkers. But whn u bad nd don't give a f*ck. Then everything comes easy!
Okay I'm obsessed with the song"Broken Hearted" by Karmin!-Kelly
I need some more hats
I admit, most my friends who watch hentai are Asian-American, but there's also hispanic, white, and black friends too
Ugh I hate being confused and lost. Tomorrow will be interesting
we will. I know it.
Cute!! That's 's daughter, right?
yeah me too. :)
ha! may i ask what "anglo" is?
Not that we are aware of. :(
pretty excited to hear debut some of their new tunes tonight
so do you, and you funny :)
Catching my breath is the term I use when the world turns its back on me.
Thanks Bella!!! :) RT : happy mothers day E!! <3
Punk rock is making me so poor
Spread the word: Episode 59, including our interview with 'web frontiersman' , is live! www.insideactingpodcast.com
I just realized it's my birthday in 3 weeks.... eeeeeeeeeeeep!!!! Can't wait to turn 21 and FINALLY be legal to drink!
Alright alright alright (Kevin hart ) voice##
The 2012 Indianapolis Colts schedule comes out. Think they'll play the Denver Broncos at some point?
#BOYFRIEND10DAYS Let's get this trending for ;D so he can show us the single cover *__*
>2 hours of sleep
8 more days til I move out of Cambridge :o
Whose goal was to over throw Ferdinand Marcos and his dictatorial regime and bring back democracy in the Philippines.
my bad i had class but yeah i was in the study hall were are u now
s/o depaull bball squad had it going crazy too
He will deliver highest ratings on election day and then hopefully you will give up Twitter!
Yay first day at school was so good , sykeeeeee!
That's why you pinch hit for Wandy Rodriguez.
yeah he seems tight as hell! Next time im gonna stop
I'm not a Facebook status though, you dont have to like me.
listening to circa survive :D
*txt* I DONT KNOW!
thank you for the post. It was very helpful.
We've been awfully quiet. Not our usual raucous selves. This good behavior must come to an end :)
James Blake's, 'Limit To Your Love' > Feist's, 'The Limit To Your Love.'
Carving a strap, roses end to end. Wondering why I underpriced it so much. No profit. Still tons of fun! And it's going to be gorgeous.
Kentucky v. Kansas begins at 8:20. Who are you rooting for? And when are you getting to Theory for 1/2 price wings and great drink specials?
Welcome to the Challenge Sheila Gullett in New Bremen, OH!! So so excited for you! You are absolutely going to LOVE it!
Thanks for volunteering! Our PALs are amazing! :)
Last night of !
Both LA teams closed.
You are welcome!!
Warning accepted :)
Hands down, I'm too proud for lovee
Celebrate the people you love everyday not just today. Happy v day
thanks for the follow, we were getting worried you didn't love the KG team! ;) We didn't want to have a Kung Fu Walk Off!!!
Just saw Kenny Rogers and Lionel on tv. They looked surprised
Things that can't be measured have a don't get resourced, so ignore them all you want, I'll have fun spendin ur grant money ;)
You can't say no to the beauty and the beast (oh but which is which?)
Does anyone know HD camcorder with easy to edit Final Cut Pro import? Looking for suggestions.
Shit happens and it sucks. Always Respect yourself, keep your head up high and progress forward to a #healthy you!
well bye bye its time to get ready for work, omg omg omg i have to get out around 10 or before to go on a date with my sweetheart :)
Sex Game..#SoOfficial!
Tag map page on Squinchpix now alphabetical as well as by frequency. Try it!
what do folks use to build their yearly schedules? any recommendations?
god awful pickup! Way too old, don't see how this helps the team.
Hey everyone, check out our new branding! Designed by Sara Coffey!
Awe the Animals on the Today show are cute(:
did he seriously do that?
Looking for a part-time evening Reference Librarian in New York, please contact me if you are interested and I can tell you more about the …
Do you think you could help me. Thank you so much! Singing is my life :)
Well well, here we go again
": Another nice comeback win for the #Orioles." Mr Reimold>CLUTCH!
don't party too hard...if I'm not there! ; )
I've watched my fair share of NBA games, and I don't know if I've ever seen a team get BEAT DOWN as badly as the Lakers did last night
You lift my feet off the ground spin me around you make me crazier ♥
How do u have tickets?
Cool. Now I know...
RT : Listening to salsa at work, that's how you know you put a buncha hispanics into one office// LOL!
it doesn't say drunk resistant. ; )
FURSHOW MAN..GOTTA DO IT BIG U KNOW "ITS MAJOR"..
Ladies with #CONFIDENCE you have the ability to achieve and accomplish ANYTHING!! #KNOWWHOYOUARE u will than at dat moment b
I'm Prime Minister of pissing people off. The Ruler of Rubbing You The Wrong Way & Shit.
Ever have moments when everything comes #fullcircle? I have
watching the saints kick off the season at b-dubs who dat!!
No one Compares to me...
Jeremy Lin is hot garbage. Worst team in the NBA and they lose...good game.
Man down!
The sun will come out tomorrow, tomorrow...bet ur bottom dollar that tomorrow, there'll be sun! (thanks, Annie)
Terminal 2 at SFO now has a YOGA ROOM. In addition to raw food, Blue Bottle, gluten free cupcakes + Cowgirl Creamery.
Wow people are lame arguing over a game
When you purchase any tile from Byrd you qualify for a 10% off discount on any Cote D'Azur fixturing from
Kanye's a genius
How and where do we go to catch "the Boss" here at #sxsw ?
How had I forgotten how wonderful wine is? It's absurd that I've only been drinking coffee at night. I need to start some new habits!
Ima be the first to tell Happy Birthday. Ima call him at 11:58 , his phone line better be open too (:
Happy New Year!
Thanks. Wish they could share this more broadly.
Wow long time since I been up here
We all LOVED you.(Virginia FCCLA) You helped us improve our leadership and plus most of us think your super hot!! Lol!
I was going to disparage my fellow Americans about National Chocolate Chip Day" but when I switch countries its still there. Screw you all.
Talk that Talk ! :)
then I would be considered "creepy" LOL
talk to me about your story. I'm the mother of a cutter.
Sometimes we don't ask the question because we are afraid of the answer. Ask us, all we want to do is give you the answer right for you.
TWEETING FOR A CAUSE | #FollowFriday #FF Know others?
RT God is in control
I don't check personal e-mail very often during the day.
• My opinion doesn't affect the Brewers, MLB, or baseball. It doesn't cause global warming or cancer. Doesn't matter.
If marathon runners train to be competitive, that means you have to take same methods to apply them to your career. Research & practice!
yah I fell asleep last night
Jim Morrison, of the 60's rock group The Doors, was the first rock star to be arrested on stage.”
why ppl keep challenging you man you gots the energy pimpin keep it goin cant wait to see u blowing up
#GuysNeedToLearn to prove that were not that bad..
I can't believe how much is growing in such a short time. I remember following him when he had less than 500 followers
follow back
Just got done shooting this Russian Mafia film
Exactly! Great meeting you, too! :)
RT : I haven't read the book yet (it's next in my queue) but I already know the answer: the hair. Especially when unkempt.
Would love to see a compiled list, enjoy the chats and mailbag questions. Keep it up
Happy Mother's Day to all those special enough to be called "Mom"
Just name the day...RT : Did a business lunch this afternoon. Safe to say I could do more of those.
Thanks you Thanks so much Bigs Twugs
Watching the grinch who stole Christmas with two adorable boys :-)
About to make a video for and (:
sext me meow
i feel you.. I see understandble
Hey my cousin's dog has the same name as your sister. You should follow me :)
i'm drunk, what's up bitches!! lol jk but i am single..and this is a fact.
As a writer, if you get the small details write, readers will "trust" you on bigger fictions. But mess up the small stuff...
Thanks for the RT!
This is where wearables would come in handy. There's just the dizziness problem to deal with...
Had to miss school today becuz i got a job interview at hooters hotel casino.
This breaks my heart. Please know I will be praying for you!!!
glad you like the app for , Kevin! We are super excited to release it.
RT CEO of Friendship Pub. Charter School Donald Hense: You dont do this alone, I've got a lot of wind beneath my wings.
Purposely messing up in "temple run" to get a better look at wtf actually chases u.
Hope everyone has a Happy Easter, and we look forward to seeing everyone at next Friday's Open House Party!
I'm sorry.... I only like the nice dinosaurs... Not the scary ones :/
me too
Hope u have fun
These high schoolers are totally immature! Then again, it is after prom for them. Whatever. Learn so manners!
We ran for our lives for like 3-4 blocks straight :O
#goodday trend continues.
Oh dear. Allergies make things so hard. Looks like you found something though. Sounds delicious.
I really fucking love my iPhone 😍
Today is Sunday and Recruiters will review your resume in the AM. Visit www.hrjobboard.com and apply to jobs that will put you back to work.
Congrats! Thanks for the tip.
Former JET program teachers looking for #Fukushima community orgs or fire depts to stream donations. Ideas pls. #quake #japan pls retweet
You aren't here in DC for the GSM workshop, are you?
Happy Hour. Right now. 4-8pm. Do it.
well. okay. back to fan girling over 5 homosexuals. c:
Olivia calls her favorite barista "CoCo" hahaha! Maybe she should change her name tag!
yeah, and usually not a huge price diff btwn stations anyway. Awesome mpg on the neon! I get around 25 on my crv...
Thanks for the RT & mentions. I love getting inspiration.
One result has gone the right way, YES! Mon the Eire, mon!.
thank you!! I hope you're doing well!!
one day will follow me on twitter !
Gah! That's really bad. This week, most likely. I need to hit up L.
I Jus Want Kobe to get 6 Then I wont Root For LA. Only Way They Can win Is If Bynum/Pau Play like yesterday every game
Media tweeps... story idea: kickball- a unique way to get fit outdoors this spring! DM me or email
Great chat today! Let me know if you have more postal service questions ;)
Thx for the Revolución Shout out!
sent me the video !
I couldn't build an app for the life of me but this sounds like a great idea!
Goodnight everyone! goodnight Austin. I love you! - would you like to be my 300th follower, you know what to do.. -
I thought so too. Vick villified for dog abuse, Chris Brown gets Grammy for domestic abuse.
ohh. I'm guessing you like it? :)
I'm so proud of the IB seniors
Haha you have to wait for that second wind to kick in and you can usually down at least one more bite...then the self loathing.
I actually liked avengers. Thought it would be extremely corny, which it was, but I liked it.
Excited for a little date night tonight w/ , sorry , you have to hang out with grandma tonight!
probably just saw a good 10k of taxpayer money wasted on a false alarm. but #SFFD rocked
I feel good. I feel better than James Brown. I feel better now. How do you feel?
"the initiative"? Does this guy work for Dharma?
People who don't know how to keep themselves healthy ought to have the decency to get themselves buried, and not waste time about it
Bartender at has the best stories ever.
There is a thread on my FB feed where Mary Thorp would like to learn how to tweet-- could you assist her? Thank you!
Not your ordinary Tex-Mex: New restaurant to feature the cuisine of ...
Thanks for all you brought to the , you rule
Perhaps a blog post highlighting YOUR Tweet reactions from tonight's episode of is in order :)
If it's in a broader of context of courses w greater pedagogical diversity, yes. Otherwise it might just be jarring.
61 RSVP's since yesterday afternoon - and only 64 spots remaining. is flying in from Colorado for it, even!
At least we reach Q.final unlike arsenal. . .
Congrats on the BBCA show. I really enjoyed it. Hope there's more to come!
I need to give 's new album a listen.
"Soul" is so rooted in Black identity
Omg did that just happen
Do they not pay us just for being cute? :)
Thanks RT : is a cutie I didn't know you was following me?
Studying for chem is awful...except when my favorite person in the world brings me smoothie king!!
Yes, Grothman is a complete Loser. Watching him lie will suck you dry. No worries: He WILL be RECALLED!
fister v nova... not exactly the game 5 match up I was looking for but its all good. lets go
I believe in god .... And i believe that any one also couldve created the world and we all believe in somethin ehh ?
Just rediscovered - bad ass. B/c the world doesn't need any new t-shirts. Check 'em.
still not working, nah is it a good match or what?
she had cancer ;o you're late! 😱
And here we go...
Dj Chucky Chuck back on deck again in the Orlando..The Original Mega DJ ..!!!!
Search by Language has been added. Example: Russian speakers search other Russian speakers. Persians search other Persians. 100% Free
No class today!!! Bootcamp bound!
no flaming baseballs for me haha
Philly sold out so bad tonight.
WHATS GOOD DENVER
which one u watchin....
It was so cool riding the ferry during #EarthHour. Opera House lights + the Sydney Harbour Bridge were off!
RT : Do you think Mike Woodson is the right guy for the job? (I like Woody...sure why not? Team needs a PG)
What do you guys think of "Delicious Things" as the name of my new cooking show? It'll give me an excuse to have gay porn stars assist!
I MISS XAVIER OMG :( F!!kLove It Dies Out
Fourth Call Me, Maybe Sports Corner
Don't flee New York for President's Day without getting you FIT-on first! Rohan will work you out to global Bollywood w.
All my hoes conceded
“: If you ever want TERRIBLE advice… Just ask the bruhz” LMAO
Oh no worries that sounds like a great night! Is it playing locally in Philly?
suggest they see or another editor...
A strong woman knows how to keep her life in line. With tears in her eyes, she still manages to say "Nah, Im fine"
what??? who the hell is hary??
Oh i already met him last friday but i wanna see him again
Recession solved: fiverr.com. Thanks, internet. You always have the answers.
Corporate Run connects job with jogging
First you don't start handing out corporate tax cuts if you want to balance the budget.
Privacy should be cherished.
Amazing, amazing, amazing! You were already one of my favorites but you shot up way high for me! You've got my vote(s)!
Wenger lost the match. Why not go with what had worked before. Trying Rosicky in Cesc position was begging to lose
Guess everyone is getting ready for the Oscars....I, however, have to get ready for bed....baking call is always early..beep beep at 3am z
- Daragh, A very belated "Thank You" for the #FF last week.
Classes online aren't so bad!! 👍👍
After eating s Doritos Locos taco, claims, " I came all over myself!"
I have no idea how that works. I just finished Fly Away Home by Jennifer Weiner & wanted to lend it to you-very appropriate!
I love when my fav bands cover my other fav bands!! #sugarland cover of
My pleasure!!
Make it rain on dem hoes
Hey how are you? :P
RT : More vendors for the Booze Bazaar, 12/3/11 Chop Butchery, Portland Pepper Sauce and...
#NF xoxo gm.. #mash that button for me bae
RT What a brilliant ad/billboard/photo - check it out!
YES STAY INSPIRED!!!
Fuck all you guys !
The dude probably dont know what to write when Black people call out racism against Whites. The guy's scared.
DID YOU LOVE IT?!
How is everyone doing?
Of course!! Your website looks great btw!
Kazoo's are making a comeback in Rihanna's "Where Have You Been".
Scott Caan quits acting for professional wrestling. With tag line 'Caan u smell what Scott Caan is cookin!?'
Is pulling up to wait for your food a thing of the past in drive throughs? I just want my coffee
Shocked we had a good lunch in the wind... not sure why 115degrees is more comfortable than 25mph winds to Vegas folk but we accept
but we all have our unshared personal archives. Hence the value of #criticalcommons for another mode of collab
Food for thought: If Patsos had stayed at UMD, he would have been their head coach.
I should be driving to The Lou for Arch Madness right now. Le sigh.
At LGA waiting on my plane to Minneapolis for #aam2012 Looking forward to meeting other #aamemp 's
My head exploded after trying to make sense of the last life cycle diagram-- although that may have been the point
electpavarini today from 5pm to 7 pm meet and greet at grump,s in tremont on west 14
wrapping up our first camp-rey here on weds. our students and teachers are awesome!
guess what!!
whats a pink dolphin?
Ima be in Vegas Friday & Saturday. Anyone looking to meet up for a business meeting?
Next up: Remy Peritz on EPIC FAILURE.
"Backwards compatibility is one of the best features of the Web and we wouldn't want to break that."
holla at me in bout n hr...we wont be leaving our place til then
I usually don't like dumb portmanteaus but Rombie is pretty good.
Just got 1000 beautiful new CDs in!!!
whats up with the hoopers in the wilmington area. fill me in tweeples. besides new hanover who's got talent?
wanna pick me up?
Let the games begin!!
Will you do the moonwalk for us? May 24 Section 102 seats 13 and 14 #1Dtourusa We love you! Love, Alexi and Tabi!
The best DJ is , GOO FOLLOW HIM :), wish i had his job #IWantBTRAutograph hoping to win an Autograph
Dear Charles Barkley: Welcome to Irony Town. Population: You. Don't rip on my city, big guy.
drunk sister: bad boys bad boys! who you gonna call?
Memphis Grizzlies On Fire!! Believe Memphis!!
I wuv you
★ ★ Be sure to checkout our newly launched website www.MOMENTUMCLEVELAND.com and see what we can do for your next party or event!!!!! ★ ★
Where has cider been all my life?
#FF , cubiclechick, , miss seeing you all and hanging out at
hey! When is u next song /video coming out?
@ thanks man! Do you have anything I can listen to?
I am passionate about learning with my PLN! Thanks #AIMSPLP and #PLPnetwork! It was a terrific culminating event!
Sucess! My Twitter is one with my Facebook. Take that, techie gremlins.
Just listened to "love songs" by missing Utah's woman Susan Powell's father-in-law supposedly about her. Unbelievable!
Gunna get big tomorrow :D
Next to me is definitely no one, I'm one of one ..And I musta won that from anybody who had it or better yet forgot it
Riesling with fresh, juicy, HUGE blackberries = perfectly delish! Esp after dinner of tilapia, asparagus & sweet pot. fries!
excellent tweet. Superb.
haha oh duh
join mine and i will join yours www.my.blastoffnetwork.com/usanetwork
While my manuscript is percolating, shall I edit the romantic fantasy or the dark contemporary fantasy? #amediting - Once I decide, that is.
Watching Ducks gamee with the familaa(=
Warm up with a pot of Iron Goddess of Mercy with a Fontina & Goat Grilled Cheese and a cup of Onion & Fennel Bisque soup
DGAF tonight with Binary Beatdown headed over to Brown to catch before hand. Mad nice out, today shall be a good 1.
Seven Minutes # BornThisWayBallTourDates
Finishing up my stained glass project for the week!
I wasn't planning on it. Where's the apartment? I was maybe gonna ride my bike.
I think that's all that matters ;-)
Revised typo into another typo. Well played, brain. Well played.
I Know What I Mean
it would be so cool to live in someone else's mind for a day.
I woke up, I am warm, I have shelter :)
Join us tomorrow for our fundraising event. Paula Deborah, will discuss her role on
i dont have comedic favorites
Pray for Joe Paterno, his friends and family. PSU will remember the good times.
I am disappointed. I was hoping for your considered critique, not abuse. Agreement not necessary, civility appreciated.
Inspired by Ignite Baltimore.
Friends, help us welcome the new Behavioral Optometry Academy Foundation (BOAF) to Twitter!
And all these parents who think they coaches... U wana coach join a team otherwise shut up! Damn
well thanks stacey lol and kes we need to pick one and start training :)
code for watching the notebook with your match
Really in a bad way about this one.... Too damn young....
by all means. U r up early huh?
Got reprimanded at starbucks for trying to take pic of menu because they list calories of items ON MENU. Makes u rethink the tall.
she mentioned when the show opened that you can't say certain things on certain stations and day time tele cables different
sorry i just had to :)
what are u doing for St. Patty's??
Haha and rocking it, I'm sure! // RT: : Wearin a flower in my hair tonight like I'm :)
miss ya more....u gotta come visit for memorial day
Turned in my YA Novel to Harper. Some magic happened in the writing of this book. Can't wait for it to come out next yr.
Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology have joined forces to offer free online courses
Heading to Leadership Institute in AM, if servitude is beneath you then Leadership is above you!!
We're recording this afternoon and evening Anyone want to bring by some Grey Owl?
Omg mrs.cameron gave the whole philosophy class gifts that is SO sweet
Thank god I stayed home today #sick 😷
defense will be more attackinhbw New scheme n schedule is another thing. We also got a much easier schedule unlike last yr
slow day in the office...might just cut out early! Happy Friday y'all
good luck today...you get that pic I printed out
We like 'swanky'! Thanks! RT : Swankiest hotel choice we could have made. Night club starting Wed? Awesome.
Did you receive the holiday voxbox from ? What did you think about it?
Cheap wine tastes like sangria...but they didn't mean to make sangria. But it's still booze.
Headed to LA without my card.
my brother used to work there!
No, I didn't see her!
A/S/L
the TV show Frasier. I watch it every day.
Thank you, and : Yes! A pretty great day!
ALERT: Attention bikers, don't get off your bike in the middle of a congested road on campus. Someone might run into you. (via )
BBQing? Come and get all your bbq food items...try our delicious marinated chicken!
LIKE US LIKE US LIKE US!!!!
inspiration can come from some of the most random things and when you least expect it :)
nice! I'm thinking U of M, if GM doesn't move me, but we'll see. Hope you are well!
December 21st presents at with special judge . Doors open at 7pm, show starts at 8pm
Are you ready for some football?
Add me on LiveProfile my PIN is LPFFWIQZ
i need more followers follow follow follow
Good Morning , we're hoping to see you this weekend for .. Can you make it to #MidtownMiami on Saturday ?
thnx.... Follow me on my account this one is boring
has single-handedly reinvented my love for
wow arla wow :E lol hahaha ill get u back for that one babe
Go get your head stuck in a garbage disposal.
aww thank you!
M, i love danger juice! 1 part cranberry juice, 2 parts pineapple juice, 1 part peach schnapps, 2 parts Malibu, 20 parts deliciousness!
totally agree...he's great!
good to be back. It's been a long time
TONITE BABES CABARET !! WITH THE !! SCOTTSDALE RD .. HIP HOP ALL NIGHT VIDEO SHOOT
You must have huge plans for NYE.
Just had my little people fix: kindergartners + music (always) = Tons of Fun!
This has been such a good week for me. I've been in a good mood like all week and I'm so happy :]
Yes - details soon“: are you doing the CMA Fest again this year? I wasn't able to come to last years signing”
the new one off exit four
31 days of Halloween!!;)
Wish I could go outta town for memorial day weekend 
The outsiders is my favourite and Ugh ponyboy and johnny are my LOVES
I seriously love you!!!!
Tru but what about the ones that do happen 2 hear voices in the mind n dnt know why n dnt understand it,like me.or am I crazy.?
#NowPlaying How Far is Heaven by Los Lonley boys...YouTube it..and Nomi has some new shoes and glasses girl...
pointless fights <<<<
And, of course, on a day I could totally get away with sleeping in, I'm wide awake at 5:30 AM.
Somebody pleas explain that Kony shit to me...
On my way! To my dental appoiment going to be in pain all day so don't call only text ok my friends
See RENT at NewRep in Watertown. Nick Sulfaro shines as Angel, but blue hairs might swallow teeth when he bares all in the death scene.
These #knicks better show up to WIN tonight! We need every victory before saturday
we are gonna put our stuff on iTunes very soon
I would love to have the link! Thanks so much!
agreed, especially if they are talking extra loudly and purposefully trying to distract others from getting their workout on!
hell u aint got no choice lol
#nf she BAD too!
Need ideas for employee development OUTSIDE the classroom? Come to my 4pm session (TU320) rm 501 to learn + share!
Watching NASCAR in HD
It's jazz fest. I am playing at a fancy hotel.
I hate how I need to eat every couple hours or I get sick :/ fml
STUPID. RELEASE SO LATE. ):.
i cant stop staring at the sexyness in my background...omg!
The have signed Burt Reynolds. He is Robinson Cano's cousin. We hope he has a righteous mustache.
unless maybe you're attacking the manufacturers of those "sexy ___" costumes geared at prepubescents, etc. ok I'm done now sorry
Want to see how it feels to putt Augusta greens? Play Cascata near Las Vegas. Wicked fast, as the FG crew discovered today.
We want to be part of this!
hang in there buddy.
#lunch is in 53 min, which means the day will be almost 1/2 done...hey who's counting?
Baby oh baby we hit these free throws and its over! Clipper Nation rise up!
i'm not beautiful! i don't like me :/ but thank you my sweetie :) ♥
Phoenix is working its way into some heated weather. It will be over 100 degrees by Saturday... What's the summer gonna be like...
Justin Faulk is DESTROYING the Worlds with his shot. Beauty of goal on the PP. USA leads 3-0 over Finland.
I'm sorry buddy, just seeing this now. The killer isn't a cop, some neighborhood watch guy or something
Oh of course I got my ticket like two months ago!!
i need those
Tweet your tee for a free download code from our new album
ALL hell's gonna break loose tmrw! Where u gonna hide it, promise I wont play. U have created a monster...again, Im sure :)
Gay Hoes These Days.. No Class.
ha I was like "damn he can almost shake his ass better than me" LOLOLOL
#TRUTH IS WHEN I SAY I LOVE YOU ND YOU SAY IT BACK
not yet, but we did have a bacon tart, bacon chocolate chip cookie, and bacon ice cream last night at
Shopping for diamond earrings to cure a crappy day? Sure, why not.
Instead of publicly wishing my mom a happy Mother's Day, I'm going to call her. Like in ye olden tymes.
that is so disturbing I can't stand it.
Inspiration for the day: a fat one-legged pigeon. Get it, pidge.
Thanks,I have 3+ years molbio lab research/mgmt but just got MPH so looking for public health jobs (policy, research, advocacy).
This is exactly what Hart/Jacobs did in early 90's. I think both ACab & Santana have lots 2 prove yet. Ideal contract lgth imho
Awk already tweet that movie
He looked like a gremlin. -stephanie, about this guy who talked her last night.
No, they're very good for helping li'l old ladies across the street.
Its hard 2 break cycles unless u have peeps 2 support u & keep u accountable @ the same time-Thats what we do :)
You're not a dealer, you're just taking advantage of someone's addiction.
thank YOU!!
Thanks for having me, looking forward to more!
RT God, that makes me feel old. --> Makes me feel sick!! Graduated high school 37 years ago!! Retired Military w/22 yrs - 15 ago!
Just downed a bottle of water right before going to bed. NOT
Guide us on paths of righteousness and lead us in the ways of justice and love
My brother is watching WWE or as I like to call it Men In Panties lol.
I look down on you peasant Undergraduates... You know why?..... Cuz I graduated.
Wow. I haven't been up on things. Big Congrats! I just saw that you're going to the Tide. Great hire for them. Be blessed.
Thank You! RT : #FF and because they are awesome people!!
The plan today is more #WWI images/posters; blog posts either on #ncscifest or the records move; maybe #CW150 metadata.
I hope it rains soon because lightning just fried our sprinkler system.
We're just two love birds that's why we're always tweeting **
Thanks for the RT!!!! be sure to get some good food.
ZOMG, pumped for #Springsteen in September! Early bday gift to myself! (cc )
Mis-read a print in a way that I liked. Originally thought it said: Life is too short to do something that "matters." :-D
Z at dance class, mama free for a few minutes to play on twitter! :)
ARE YOU STILL SKYPING WITH PEOPLE?!
Rock night on #xfactor and not a single rock singer. Epic Fail.
wait, they're talking about arrays at #drupalcon?
“: just beautiful” well thank you!
who is Helsip going to guard on KY ? Even in a zone this is a major advantage for UK !
celebrating the end of #WineWeek with an ice cold beer w/
I have Skype I just don't know my name tell me yours and I'll add you
The length of a film should be directly related to the endurance of the human bladder. Alfred Hitchcock
Watching #slaverybyanothername on #PBS. Nice to see my friends and colleagues sharing their knowledge!
scene from The Meaning of Life. The administrator is coming. Turn on the most expensive machine & the machine that goes bing!
WE Got One Of The Best Studios In The 305 Area! Come Visit Us TOday!
Today has been a good day for the most part
I will be your hero if youll be my
oh how i love a cookout huge tea
I know that you guys are goinbg to win b/c you deserve it the most!!! You guys were and still be amazing!! I love you guys <3
Told u that u wouldn't die always positive big bear
let me know what you think!
Well he sucks at The Free Throw Line lol. Both The Heat and Pacers missed so many FT shots
Holy Shit Barbara Walters arms are long
following u follow back
And George C. is pretty cool too....
Thanks so much!
Charlotte, North Carolina
Today I need a flashlight.
Why live my personal values at work? This is an excellent question to ask. If your attorneys are planning an insanity defense.
Whatever ! Don't listen to him. Am I supposed to tell you it's good not to want to go to school? No! I'm not
what's the hurry?
thx for reminding! Trying to shake loose to make the event, if so - we'll throw down for sponsor.
Prob not a good sign if while fucking you're thinking "how will this damage us.. psychologically?"
I forgot my headphones in my car so I'm blaring my music out of my iPod tonight
Still need to put your will in order? It’s never too early to think about estate planning and save your loved ones from undue hardship.
What would you do if walked in while u were playing bball and be was looking for a pickup game?
What is your favorite game or activity at a baby shower???
Don't yu just love when they guy you like texts you saying hey beautiful(:
driving with my dad = 😡
Maybe they read your column detailing an agenda that is adversarial to theirs. Nicely done.
Email us and we'll see what we can do!
How's #bdnt these days Boulder?
Are you going to the party tonight? Loved your talk. Would love to chat while you're here.
Gov. Scott Walker tells AP he plans series of recall ads with real people talking about his initiatives
Surely! We'll keep you posted about the 'new' iPad in (about) two weeks :)
Virgin Galactic's Isakowitz: drawing on heritage of to open space like 707 did for aviation
Are you confused by terms and acronyms your HVAC contractor uses when talking about your indoor comfort system? Don’t be!...
Stoked by the unbelievably POSITIVE response of all our fans on the pick-up. We'll make the wait so worth it!
I'm looking for distributors that specialize in amusement/water parks. Any referrals would be appreciated.
Nba tommorow finally seems like we missed alot of it but dosnt matter now!!!! Its game time!
Check out new Thanksgiving post, Turkey Talk! When u grow out of a food allergy, you have much to be thankful for! www.theallergistmom.com
Correx to earlier post:Greenwood-Phinney Chamber of Commerce suspends operations (not dissolves) as it reinvents itself....
Its crazy how I haven't heard from my mom all week till mother's day smh SAD
49ers vs. The Giants NFC Title, trip to the big dance. who is going? Who is not? Where will be the best pace to watch the game this Sunday h
its May Day! up tha punx!
#ireallywant to get away for a while
Making scratch-art fish with 300 preschoolers this morning... and 's coming tonight!!! :D :D :D :D
wats good bro show sum luve out here
NW "Life After" with Al Reynolds (Star Jones ex husband) #Interesting !
Innovation at Domino's Pizza is chopping up some bread sticks and sprinkling cheese on it. Might as well rename it Mensa Pizza
Round 2 was rough
Aww! Such a stylin' girl :) Honestly though, green is big for spring '12.
The color of your eyes run deep through me, I stand alone waiting for you. "It's About Love" by The Medic Droid.
Date with my #1 man :)
If you say so ... RT: Jimmy the Groundhog did NOT see his shadow - that means an early spring! YEAH!!
Last year a woman groom or backside worker went missing after Derby. Was she ever found?
You're still funny as hell- I love your show! You inspired me to lose the rest of my weight & I feel great! Keep up the gd wk
I never imagined I'd call a late-August trip to Sarasota a respite from the heat but, 90 feels pretty awesome after 3 months of 105.
one of the best speakers I've ever seen. Thanks Chris!
And that's what people pay for - to see the bad guys get beat. Sonny Liston
it's basically the best day in history. And that's a fact.
Celtics offense looks awful...and defense for that matter
Yum! We just might!!
Maybe it's genetic?
Fox News is reporting that Brad and Angelina are engaged. So... that means they're really NOT, right?
Ugh this game is frustrating.... Just can't get it going
Bitch i would dog walk yo ass.... Pls play with me.... YOU FUCKING WITH FIRE BAYEE ;)
Thanks for the #FF shoutout bro!
All this stupid shit won't matter in the future
wtf? I just got this:(
out with the old in with the new
Freeze frame!
The future, according to some scientists, will be exactly like the past, only far more expensive.
Need help claiming venue 364738 or recovering log in information. Please help!
is pretty morbid Funny too.
June. Will you be to travel / show me the city?
Thank you for carrying !
God is in leading us, God is by our side, God is above us & right in our faces, while chasing us down with blessings at that!
we pushing our luck for three days in a row tomor? lol
Good Morning. :)
(2/2) Also, if JavaScript were a man and not an inanimate programming language, it'd be getting a swift kick to the groin right now.
and jitt!? you the jitt im older than you!
Honestly. I'm glad the Rock won.
Bahaha. Oh you have a new handle. Me gusta. Slash I always picture Snow White now. Lol
My coach told me he doesn't eat pizza. Something's definitely wrong with him
I did bitch but u need to go fuck urself and leave my sexy boys alone YOYO
I get the feeling that Machop, Machoke and Machamp would be very popular with bros.
and are looking and SOUNDING amazing this afternoon
the haters who continue to slam the 85 yo woman for her olive garden review are heartless losers. let the woman have her opinion.
Happy Birthday Jason! (CA timezone barley 12 hehe :). ) Anways Have A Fun Day!!!
love the way life goes when your focused...u will have to sacrafice some things...but go hard NOW , in the end, everyone will be happy
I'm intrigued. Is Darryl Hannah in it?
You never realize how much you like someone until you watch them like somebody else.
Oh is that all? RT : “If you want to be loved, be lovable” Ovid
Just checking in to see if I could see the slides from your Seattle 2.0 awards presentation. :)
not much just been on my music grind!
Oh, shit! They all did die!!! Well.
Hot deals to celebrate the hot hot heat outside, www.dealshow.com
:) thanks you too
RIP Rapping Bum: "When you walk out UDF, I just pray you got some change lef.. Without a doubt, Buckeyes don't turn me out"
Is that Dwayne?
Get it back get it back bitch I kno I got it back already
I mean the former!
Congratulations to & on their impressive wins last night at Scott Trade Center catch the replay on
naw I was trying to get one at my base but I didn't have my 5 skill level yet ... But y'all got 135s out where u at tho???
yaaay! That will be awesome!
Long long day. Up since 630 just got home. Getting things done ppl just don't get.
Without health life is not life; it is only a state of langour and suffering - an image of death. -Buddha , We need to change our diet!
Everyone in my life is losing their fucking minds
I will go out and do a dance for the Sun Gods. Back yard where no one will see me.
I believe I said that before
Hey Artsy #Photography people... Meet ! He is an amazing #Detroit photographer and an equally amazing person!
OMG your hair is amazing!!!
When i randomly drop things for no reason of course i say shit under my breath mostly :-)
will you follow me.?(:
@ Camden Yards in Baltimore about to do my last set. Finally an outside gig that isn't a 100 degrees!! :)
RT : Tonight #wjchat is talking Audio + web journalism with guest host
Wise words by a wise man.
working for that cash machine
OPT karaoke
Me too. :( RT ": I really, really wanna watch Αvengers"
Play with politics with and Paul Auster #InConvo tonight at 6
It was, Barbara.. Tx! I plan to share the learning & wrksh back w/ my team at Bose.
Much respect to all of those union actors who find ways to help aspiring #filmmakers by going under the radar. #IWonderIf one will see this.
Me and my mom are the worst at being on time.
Harder to remember on beautiful #summerdays but: Do the Worst Things First! Makes the whole day easier so you get out while its still light!
naa , I don't need to put on a front . Sad thing is you don't know me at all .
Heard from TSA agent: "please remove all electronical devices." Feeling secure in my English.
Songs: "Suddenly C3PO," "Fett Me," "Mushnik and Twin-Suns," "Somewhere That Hasn't Been Blown Up Like Alderaan"
U not on ya job wit this Twitter get ya network on bro
Told Evan that Giants and Yanks make up for Knicks. What does he have making up for his ETS? Dan Murphy raking singles.
a lovely find. thank you
CUNT. CUNT. CUNT. CUNT. I JUST WANT TO LEAVE FOR WORK ALREADY.
Super-duper shout out to the best promoting homie in the biz & Studios,
Alright final question that we'll put out there for this afternoon is coming up next.
Tears will get you sympathy, sweat will get you results!
#MardiGras eve. All request video Monday What will you show for MillerLite beads and your song? & at 8pm
“The secret of business is to know something that nobody else knows
First off, I would call the cops on Tammy dumb ass. Let her get locked up for trying to be a 40 year old bully. This ain't 5th grade
I wish I was Gunita's friend... She's next to me... She's so cool
Yo Mama so fat when she went to the movies she sat next to everyone.
Mark Reynolds the walking fool.
All I wanna know is what happened at Yogurtland one night for them to have to have a cop sit in front of it?
Oh, how much I heart Blue's Egg.
You called the Manning to Denver move....How about Tebow to Cardinals now? Makes sense and can compete and far from AFC West
I'm at my breaking point. I don't want to do this shit anymore.
I can't believe my Anger doesn't even register. Is it I'm atypically nice here? Hey screw you! Gimme Anger points!
So y'all just gon watch him shoot dat huh ?....cool.
Words cannot describe how I feel about you because I don't feel anything about you.
Blogging and marketing and growing my professional service firm clients: accounting & law firms, etc. Meizcorp.com
is facing an uphill battle against and , but I have to say the commercials have been excellent.
PREPARED. ASKED FOR MY FILE BEFORE THE MEETING! SHE PLANNED ON SLOWLY INFORMING HERSELF ON MY DOLLAR IN FRONT OF ME.
check out my new blog www.bowlingdo.com
haha! Well I'm glad at least someone got to enjoy the brownies! Major #fail leaving those at your office!
hola muchacho! U ROCKK!! i believe justin bieber has taken over the planet! lol this will b a new experience lol
I think I'm more interested in seeing a hologram of Booger from 'Revenge of the Nerds' reenacting the belching contest scene.
Time not to check your blackberry - while running across a highway...
Note to self: must be chipper for this 10hr work day chock full of customer service to commence. Fantastic...thats me being chipper.
Buy a Santa Bag TODAY for $39.99 that includes 1 FREE week of tanning, 2 BOTTLES of lotion, and 1 PACKET of AMAZING lotion to try!!!
MIDDAY TODAY: David Cordish casino talks about proposed gambling expansion & why, of course, he opposes it
Thanks for the follow, Jon. I could definitely use your help. So clomming on to tip
just wanted to say something...um(: this is pretty hard to say but your hot
it will be around may for my birthday
It's about that time. What are you doing for lunch #Denver? !
Competition cuts down Medicare fraud
Wade bounced off BDiddy like he ran into a fat Mac truck.
dont be bitter that its a lonley world in b223 right now
hahaha my cat would NEVER let me stick a chinese container on her head- that would be the day!
freaking joe cant just replied to me on his twitcam. omg.
I think the same thing
yes, we have! We definitely appreciate and relate to their mission and goals. cc:
and why do you love me already?and ok!!!
Parks & Rec, BES and PBOT up next. Dir Abbate lists how parks support the goals of the
no more sky light, so no more peeping tom...I hope
Thought dis nigga left sum good movies
Check out these Outstanding Citizens:
Reminder - No Friday Free Day today.
Damn you, shitty weather! That's twice now that my skydiving plans have been cancelled. I don't care if there's a tornado, I'm going next wk
The family is one of nature's masterpieces. - George Santayana
he really needs to get on and read this. This is ridonculous. NIAAALLLLLL. :)
Eh, this one's lost.
Seem to be a lot of people sleeping in today...
BIG thank you for the shout. How are you?
inn Bed Whatchin TinkerBell -_* it Makes Me Miss My Nieces'
LOL! I scored an exit row seat. Yay for legroom! :)
Kind of bummed out. Will be listening at 5 pm.
#CanIBeHonestWithYou I Wish everything with my ex couldve work out for the better
I want an Adam Levine - May I have one?! Just one :) Thanks! <3
Wowzers, the timing of when my kindle decided to break is quite inconvenient...
Happy Mother's Day to all the wonderful moms out there!
I follow everyone back :)
It might not happen after work, but it is too good not to miss. BRUNCH TIME!
He's shacking up with Jada Pinkett Smith on some B-rated show..
GROW up
Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work Work
yeah we will!
Hi Shellie! Do you know if anyone in Denver, CO teaches Taebo classes? I'm 17 weeks preggers and looking for postnatal wkouts
What's your favorite cafe in #paris ? We know, we know, how can you choose just one? 1st one that pops into your head - GO!
Did we really need a Newsweek poll to know that the U.S. is divided by race?
Promote peace.
got tore up today and didn't leave the game.
Pens v avs at 9 $2 miller lite bottles during the game. $2 bud light bottles 10-12
Happy New Year my fellow tweeters!! enjoy 2012!!!!
i just wrote about sitting in an outdoor mall at night when its cold. it's like a southern california baptism.
How do I get one of them T-shrts?
It just makes sense on many levels. It is smart marketing!
thanks c:
I said what i had to say when i needed to say it!! But not who i needed to say it to..
Everyone's here like "no school for me!" And I'm like " I'm going to die tomorrow! :D"
If you say free boosie on my tl, I'm going to assume your retarded and unfollow that ass
If you don't want everyone in your business , then why be a celebrity ? It comes with the fame .
I just got back from Crossover with some of the best friends that anyone could ever have, I love having strong Christian Friends
Injury-Free Exercise for a Better Quality of Life. MindFirstFitness.
Congats to our Pushcart Prize nominees Michael Poore, Brendan Constantine, Harrison Scott Key, Brian Doyle, Joshua Ruffin, & Leslie Jamison!
me too!
Kentucky #Derby party and Mint Juleps! Isn't everybody?
- Congratulations on your Forty Under 40 recognition as well! Well deserved!
we have 0 eggs at home
Free raffle ticket with purchase to the first 50 guests today 4 the raffle during superbowl... no cover great drink prices!!!
#americanhorrorstory is a great show but it can be very story. You won't regret it.
and plot it and see which area of US has more reds and which ones have more greens
Hear a girl crying on phone crying saying "mom i dont want a basket on my bike!"
Many thanks! RT Happy #WW Authors
There is no doubt the #Angels blow this game...
"Decide what to be and go be it!" - Edge
crud. We rescheduling again?
yay! Guess I'll see you then? ;-)
Who's cooler than #levilowrey? No one... Who's equally as cool as #levilowrey?
Scared of what? A loss? I respect OKC. They're legit. Should be favored. LA will lose unless everyone plays their best ball.
I think we need to have a talk:)
great Huh representation last night. Sorry for running you over on the way to the bar, next time I will bring one back for you
Attention Followers! Our Website has Officially Launched! www.fivepointsusa.com . Check us out and let us know what you think!
I love me some #levilowrey on a Monday night
No one identifies him or herself as "the general public" so make sure you're segmenting your audience
$1 Ground Beef Tacos!!!
I Love it when a homeowner fights and gets his foreclosure sale postponed!!! Happy Friday!!!
so i'm reading #softballproblems and over half of them remind me of you! haha you have to get on their twitter page and read em!
Yeah I am skeptical. Illustrates the problem with survey research....
where can we learn more about AU's 10 year plan?
thanks. Excited to be back.
virgins are nervous...
Where to Find Quality Social Media Marketing Ideas Where to Find quality Social Media Marketing Ideas Social Media Marketing is big news
Hello Everyone! Follow the very Talented Andrea Lee . Shes soon to be the next big thing!
Yeah, in the Arena league
It feels so god to get something you've worked for.
Is programmable baby. Pledge for the parliament show now and listen to 1979 show...
Amen! MT ... candidates: show me who you are and your accomplishments, rather than just not being the other guy.
it's early 12-9 Ohio St
Hey - does Randy have any new merchandise coming out? I need some shades or at least a tshirt.
bitch jk but i cant believe u left this aweesome account :P
haha good ;) that's amazing bieber's cool. I like the song "Baby"
(parts of IN & all of HI, I believe as well) But ah yes, Arizona--That would be a nice escape from Houston this summer ;)
Follow and I will keep you up to date on the latest news. Also, check out: www.findunifi.com
Loud day in MKE. Air show @ the lake front & Rockerbox on Center st. Wish I could spend a few hrs @ Rockerbox such is life as a performer
WTF are they doing out there???
still gotta make it happen for the family! :)
I just ordered a Large Pizza and 20 Medium Wings. If you were getting 20 wings, what sauce would you order?
Responded to FIRE @ 4349 Route 43, East Greenbush, NY 12144. Red Cross auto update.
Every #wedding should be summed up in these 10 words RT : Good food, good drinks, great family, good friends, great memories
hey byootiful, wanna quote PTV? :D
Beyond excited for how this story on affordable housing is shaping up...
cant wait till u cross ova
I got hopes up because in the Wolves game he did things other than long jumpers. But Blazers front line is bad matchup.
Agreed": POST THE LINK WE NEED IT NOW #YOURGIRLDOESPARTY"
’Today’s Abbot Kinney Specials: Soups today are Ginger Carrot soup and Cauliflower. Sugar free lemonade is Blueberry Mint
Aw, hang in there! I was jobless for 13 months once!
Rethink posting an offensively named lab coat on your website.
Is going to church tonight? :)
Really looking forward to this! I loved Fun Home.
PickUpLine: Hi. I'm like a tropical island: hot, wet, and waiting for tourists.
Doesn't everyone?! ;) ": my primary takeaway from that is that you have yourself on Google Alerts. I love it. :)”
#golf at the
tweeted (: what was your question?(:
Off to dance with my ipod full of Breathe Carolina songs <3 LET THE PARTY IN MY HEAD BEGIN AND MY FEET DANCE TO ITS BEAT
Happy St. Patty's day!
Your listening to The New Music Show X EFFECT at 11p I play 3 local bands, only 1 will return VOTE 702-791-1075
Cinnabuns are kind of fucked up when ya think about it.
Im just checking up on u ;) lol
Believe me it gotta alot of bass however, it still needs work, just wanted to get some direction frm u on whatchu wanted lol
I warned you about the blackberry...
I will never get to old for spongebob!!
I'm not the type to fall in love.
hmm. perhaps the distinction is between "funded" grad students and "paying" grad students. but overall undergrads win hands down
I love football more than almost everything. But with injuries and players deaths post football, Idk where the sport will be in 10 years.
I got food poisoning from half of a weed cookie, shitting and pukin for 12 hours, at least I was high, and I still have half a cookie left
I'm thinking maybe I should be on Survivor. I think I would do ok on there. Or else they would HATE me and vote me out ASAP. Surely not.?
feelings on Salmons??
I know I've been sleeping all day.
fuck, i dropped my chicken nugget.
Did someone say arepas? I die for arepas!
That moment when you think a celebrity is dead.. then you find out they aren't. :P
Well I did some investigating on Twitter and I found out who you and Misha be fucking for rides in that Mercedes Benz.
Especially in front of people I like :/
Just had a fantastic ride! Gotta love Dusky. :) = 1 great way to sweat out a cold.
Tried to go fishing with my new pole. Gonna have to get a boat for catfishing.
I love you!
Good luck on the GMAT studies!
Way to go partner ! Hat trick up 2-0 lead by example gr8 captain, player & partner - now time for #greatjob RT
1 day away till the home opener
haha that's how scary movies work and u aren't a whore ur like Hannah
Empathize, define, brainstorm, prototype,test are 5 stages of design thinking
All good! Thanks for the mention. Hope your day is great. :)
I think you just solved the entire global economic crisis. Everybody needs to fuck more and not for free.
8 pm RT : what time does go on tonight?
feel free to apply. It's in Beaverton and 20 hours a week with heavy lifting. Not to scare just inform :)
#Caps GMGM says he hasn't thought about it a whole lot on what they will do for a new coach
nah he's going to eat while doing chair pose, right?
I know who to call wen im down
as for the timing...the pressure's been on since Biden spoke. I don't really know why now, but it's a political risk for sure
We just did some spring cleaning on our patio...new tables, new landscaping....and more. We are ready for FQF!
Don't disagree with your comment about digitalvaults.org. It all seems rather random ...
The niners may have lost but everyone loses because Madonna is doing the Super Bowl Halftime show.
Beauty is skin deep....wait isn't that a commercial?!
and it was delicious!! Thanks for joining.
Not good to be outnumbered...
I was lucky.
♬ I'm a dog , I'm a dog, I'm a dog, I'm a dog... ♬ Or at least my cuz thinks so.. And I can't prove her wrong at this point
Exactly! Always looking for the next Tiger. He's not out there. RT : I thought McIlroy was the next guy?
RT Just arrived at the ocean's deepest pt. Hitting bottom never felt so good. Can't wait to share what I'm seeing
Activity Day next week (: finna Smash in 5th period !
"is he white or black?"
I wonder what postapocalyptic horror this solar flare will bring? I hope its reanimated toasters with a hankering for the flesh of the bread
I'm good Lil mama...still pushing...u good?
I'm following her, thanks :-)
Soft white flakes starting / to fall, with grace, from the sky / layer on layer
Santana looks beautiful in her dress <3
stop telling me what to do. I help spread the word...ain't that enough?!?! Sheesh! You ask so, so much of me.
New things I just baked up!! Available on my eBay sweetreflectionz :) mention u seen me on twitter for a free hello kitty surprise bag!
Omar called Sam a wigger last night for having the Chronic on his computer
OH .. sorry .. this is awkss lmao
In breckenridge,co enjoying the winter wonderland scenery! #sobeautiful:)
RT : hopefully will get 700 followers by tonight only need another 35 please help guys by retweeting this cheers:D
since u live in Jersey do u ever see any of the boyz
Dear Mom, thank you for not raising two idiots. Both of your kids have made it through 16 without kids. And we aren't morons.
Best things are worth fighting for.
Thanksgiving is coming up this week. Just remember, viruses don't take holidays off. BE VIGILANT. And eat turkey.
it's never too soon to leave work and head out for a beer, esp. if you have completed to do list just say you have a meeting.
NWQ GRIND BOLD is Nicaragua Don Zeledon
thanks for coming out! hope you got some goodies!
I ain't comin off my last name cuz I really can't take no stressin
by the smell of the kitchen... there will be beautiful dinner tonight #hungry :b
Damn about that sleep I just got >>>>>>
RT : Assume Sweat's decision is based on concussion history. Smart kid. Has already been accepted to a number of law programs.
I am sure that it will not surprise you that I am not watching it, but let me know if you figure out how to record.
how do u think u did on the test and what did u make on the notebook check?
this game cray
Innovation is an endurance sport says
you obviously wouldn't understand lol
Hello Chicago
Last six months: Skyrim. Next six months: Fez.
me too. Miss your tweets
Twice in 30 days. Pissing me the fuck off.
Aww, no! Did you smash stuff? Did you get smashed? Is that how you got killed?
LOL - but we expect that! (truly) and you can tell (via FB) that I invited you!
Everyone at our #Derby party likes Take Charge Indy! Go Baby Go!
Money is the root of all evil, and man needs roots
What is your favorite team building activity? Would love to hear back from you and
Oh boy am I sore today! Running again tonight. 
all i want to do right now is hike up a mountain and fill my lungs with a heaping breath of God's fresh air.
I'm so sorry for your loss. Sending love your way.
Pierce The Veil is always perfect during this time of year.
Yay laundry is done
Off to watch hockey! Go Coyotes!
No ETT21 today -- We'll be back next week. Thanks!
I only saw the replay of it. Caught the last 7 mins of the game.
Haven't seen a negative comment about The Avengers. Forget the box-office, that's a huge milestone in itself.
#NGTakeAway: Caption is important! Sometimes it's the story behind/outside that draws people in. Always accompany your photo with words.
I love when I find #pineneedles in my scarves. Go Natalie.
hello dailybooth hello
please help me spread the word about missing milwaukee man, tommy hecht. last seen saturday on water street.
Officially drunk with The Carter
Courtesy flushes are a
Yes sir!
received a phone call from my daddy this pm censuring me for using the eff-word on my fb. What u think @ that, Willis?
...was looking for a nice family film to watch last night....rented "Mr. Penguin's Poppers" by accident. Oops.
My father is actually half.
Getting ready for a busy week of photo shoots and laughs!
Juiciest Grilled Chicken Sandwich: salt, pepper, lettuce, red onion, tomato, chile-lime mayo, bacon, cheddar cheese, onion bun, fruit, side!
Why the hell they playing cat woman this early...
proves why that stat is flawed.
Leaders of Pittsburgh's Jewish community are meeting with 'Abdu'l-Bahá.
let's hope
Thanks for RTs & mentions
sadness. I miss you guys more than you could ever imagine. I feel detached from my life.
It's over!!!! Hahaha laker fans thought they had it
Sorry! My facebook is for friends & fam. I could only request you if I have proof that your real. Yup, I'd need a proofpic!
fans listen in to hear the words of a loner who's sober and not flaunting about being a stoner -
"Get a degree / and take a vacation."
No bc there is a moral diff btn what's right + what's bigotry. But sometimes you have to meet ppl where they are + bring them along.
Actually got my homework done this weekend! Maybe i'm growing up ;3
Welcome to Twitter! Suggest you follow and for starters. A lot of great paralegals on Twitter.
im good can't complain how was ur mothers day
Have a great weekend,
I used the Peppermint tea tree conditioner this morning, it was a wake up call for my scalp! Thanks
RT Any viewing parties for Gm 6 tonite?>How 'bout in Boston?That's where I'm watching w/ luck!
I love retweeting things on Twitter.......#RT :)
Mr. Lang, my liver and wallet salute you.
It's time for Dodger Baseball!!!
If fake was an Olympic sport. You would win gold.
I saw a guy today with a really long head. He reminded me of the Slim Jim guy...if only the Slim Jim guy's hair was just more head
I'm glad me and seen the real in each other a few years ago and connected our networks. Thanks bro for the support
I can't believe I've lived 38+ years without being inside a Forever21. My life is now complete. Halp!
Fidel's tonight!
so that's is my neww one I would give u the link but I'm not on the comright now and yah but I don't hav any videos yet but i
Life really sucks sometimes. And it's hard to continue to be happy all the time. I CAN'T do it anymore. I'm falling apart on the inside.
Yes to half this sentence: "Rhett Butler is a pure projection of idealized male sexuality, an ever-potent cliche."
the new Wayne Is gay bruh
BRB KENTUCKY DERBY TODAY.
If I don't feel secure in a relationship I don't even want a part of it.
Interesting, but might take their focus away from actually playing game.
I don't know why but I'll cheer for any team in the #MLB before I support the BoSox. Even the Cards 😞. I just don't like them.
John McCain will be forever remembered as the man who made the crazies respectable in national politics.
Want to hear something ultra nerdy? As a little girl, the first song that made me cry was Celes' Opera from FF3. Old School snes midi track
Wrote my first short film. Very dark. Meeting with cinematographer next Wed to discuss possibly casting and shooting this.
to meet austin and alex someday but thats not happenin cause i missed austins concert in ny and he went home the day before i(c
Roasting Company?
Omg!..Loved it.
Gorgeous day in the Finger Lakes! Had a great time w/ my S.O. & family @ the Corning Glass Museum too. Glad to be back @ my alma mater too!
Fridayy... I want you now. Please?
I will let Kim know, she will be so pleased!
:) RT : Designers, make it work! Tune into Thurs 9/8c to see co-founder guest judge on
well hey there nice to see you on twitter!!
Don't say it like that keep it koo
Please please please snow enough for a snow day!!!
Had a nice chat with Jane Goodall at the Eye on Earth Conference today in Abu Dhabi - a wonderful woman who feels guided to do her work
cracks me up That Man is Funny as hell. Macaveli Chitown in the building
God is good.. All the time!! JOEL 3:10!
Man do I love Creed
wish able bikini tan lines here on this kitti this year Quen
Um maybe?! Do it. ": #drumoff rehearsal then heading to the USC/Cal game maybe?"
Thanks for the #ff and mentions
I am, but not at first. =( I'm slightly on the poor side and I had a hook-up for the regular.
MIA @ Maryland UNDER
Thankful Thankful Thankful Thankful!
I knew was thats what it was i got a sixth scence breh
Gods, why is the internet full of BAD NEWS FOR WOMEN AND GAY PEOPLE tonight?! Bad internets! Bad bigoted people! Bad!
how'd the article come out??
Wonderful news for that penguin.
Don't count your chickens. EVER.
right on
cliff lee man!!!
I lived with a cat I loved for years after developing cat allergies...
SLOPPY, SLOPPY, SLOPPY! C'mon Spurs, let's win this game!!
If, after the flash intro, a button saying "enter" popups, I leave!
Hey omg I'm so sry forgot to answer u! - hangs head in shame
whats good fool
Tonight's SHOW CANCELLED BY Sorry for any inconvenience. Please RT
My split tests with clients' open times supports it: 7am=18% open, 9am=23% open. However, this is for B2B messages, not B2C.
Coachella shooting victim shows up in ER with gunshot wound. - KESQ
Just revoked my mother's emoticon privileges. There comes a time…
afterschool chorus today was torture.
he started MLS Digital Properties and now works for MLSE corporate partnerships. He's a digital guy at heart.
Thanks for the RT!
hey u should follow me becuz im special!!!! lol!! <3
Realized for the first time how hilariously violent Looney Tunes are on the big screen!
Thx 4 great show in Portland tonite - my wife & I always wanted to see u perform - we thoroughly enjoyed it
Hey there, Miranda. You are probably outdoors leading a fabulous FitVenture of yours. Check out www.mirzukfitness.com y'all!
Lol I might have appendicitis & kidney stones! FUCKING AWESOME.
Anyone would quit if they don't believe they're good at anything.
is my co-pilot
yea im gettin real good at drawin pauly d too
Never a boring day in Memphis lmao
RT : For those of you following The Amazing Race: the Madison couple is kicking ass.
Who is Biff and how did he fall
A great film. Enjoy!
RT if you are stoked for Christmas this year!
yes fortune and supreme lobster, I am working in another bag of Taylor bay for this weekend too, FYI
Holy crap. My back & neck are beyond sore. Hahaha. \m/
B-Diamendz live on rogue army radio tomorrow with tune in!
Out in Monroeville 2night? Stop by for an evening with the folks from Multiple drafts, specials, & schwag
(Followers let's say 2getha)Now I lay here down 2 sleep,I pray 2 God my soul 2 kp,if I shuld die b4 I wake,I pray 2 God my soul 2 take..Amen
Seriously, how long until Tito rents a plane and buzzes Fenway with his ass hanging out the window during a critical series vs. the Yanks.
The weekend, is coming fast. I hope this weekend, is great.
make sure to join us on facebook as well.
But of course ;)
Finally time to get some windows cleaned, heading to St. Paul, near the capitol today.
It is for me. Are you using WiFI or cell service? Try killing the app and re-opening it?
I am offically obsessed with the walking dead.
I just got accepted the Engage Academy! I'm #PUMPED !
#Fairuse cases often defer to the well articulated norms of the community. Which is why we need best practices for fair use.
It'll be tough no doubt.If she wants to cry she gets 2.If she wants 2 be angry she gets 2..whatever she wants..
Cruising #StateStreet and checking out everybody that have begun the #MifflinStreet party early.
Pick.Click.Give kicks off in less than a month when we Alaskans apply for our PFDs online. Follow for details.
Zone defenses are useful if you are trying to slow the game down, protect vital players from fouls, or other team has bad zone o
Now that I live in a new city I find that Google Maps / local does't work the way I expect it too, for both web & mobile. Let's test bing!
FOLLOW ME BACK:) 77
lol they will forever be thirstbusters for me. I mean polar pops.
aunts w/ everyone.
Everything is going great! Only three weeks left until graduation :)
#chid480f orality vs. literacy vs. digital "literacy" different habits of mind, do these technologies change the way you think?
Pretty sure klout tracks that. "I got a +1 in Knocked Up by Fertility God from Klout!" (yeah, not really, folks.)
cos I got a couple of other friends parties to attend.
Inspect #SPDY Sessions in Chrome - chrome://net-internals/#events&q=type:SPDY_SESSION%20is:active
yo Chelsea cant win..if dem win mi stop watch football... hst
Ken Cuccinelli is threatening a possible lawsuit over the Dulles Rail Project's Phase II PLA debacle. Keep VA's right to work!
When are u doing another ustream or any video chat? i missed every single one :'c love u Dahvie (:
It turn out to be a #DaveMatthews afternoon.
that's just what I'm Lookin for
Can I Be Famous On Twitter.? Yes? No? Okay . Cool
From Africa, "ubuntu" is a beautiful word that means many things, literal translation: "I am because you are." --> ubuntu <-- :D
Working on getting the latest EVPs we did at Hawaiian Memorial Cemetary loaded for review. Caught 4 things that we can't quite make out.
who ? Mmhhh text me
Not always. Sometimes people lose sight of them and they just get drunk under the bridge.
yea it's okay. I feel like we never talk anymore
RT : A2 Think swiftly+strategically. Draw parallels between clients branding, their business objectives+strategy.
I gotcha my peoples u know I support u I wouldn't buy it bootleg lbvs
The year is dead! Long live the year!
REASON is mankind's greatest and most tragic illusion. - Carl Jung
Skillcenter expected to be a useful tool for #entrepreneurship content & social networking for
Happy 40th anniversary to my lovely Sigma Kappa sisters!
That's what I said! I really don't get the hype.
I don't think so... they may have released some information on execs to express their displeasure, but they didn't ransom it
LSU to me...": Anyone got a read on Musberger yet?"
RT if you have moves like jagger!!
Ravens Record for Sacks!!
Happy Mother's Day to you Jenny! Thanks for raising a great young man like Tom & for sharing him with us
I'm turning in nothing! Ha, but I am reading my article for class. Whoops.
Comin Too Chill / Hangg Wee Got
A headbutt from a midget hurts like all hell.
I can't wait to boo Beckett and punch a pink hat during Sweet Caroline tomorrow
The 2012 version of Will Perdue or Bill Wennington may have just saved season... or at least a 1st round #NBAPlayoffs exit.
The drawing is surprisingly effective as a percussive phenomenon! Life is good here -- hope you are well too --
I agree! Forward! He was & is timeless. (is that an oxymoron?) Besides Stevie's bass on the keys, Nate Watts always kills me!
Depressed Hawaiians/Displaced Haitians. Tomato/tomato.
No worries. :) There's just a lot of that kind of speculation going on.
Learned Today: Britt, IA has hosted the Natl Hobo Convention for 100+ years. And there they elect the Hobo King.
RT/ I'm sorry that I late send message to you.I wanted to see your great show!Nagoya in japan,in Aichi./ :) Hope to play Japan!
Good Morning :)
Just saw Good Deeds. Loved it. The little girl reminds me of my ladybugs. Too cute.
Fall down 7 times, stand up 8.
"No, ladies, you can't play with us, but you can dress like sleazy and encourage us." The guy who invented cheerleading.
Hey Pollen, U SUCK TODAY! Signed, Me!
I first noticed this when I took the new job in a more populated area. Same baby food cost me more closer to home than at work.
Fantastic people!!! Fantastic AND talented.
"So is mortadella is the mushroom or cheese family?" Hmm neither, I was doing a cross between mozarella and portabella
Yeah my dude hard work pays off!
Influenster will be running programs exclusively for moms and greens in August. Don't forget to unlock your badges!
Forget what just happened....I still can't believe his name is "World Peace" -_-
America's got talent! (:
Cool! RT : Space Shuttle #Discovery flew past NIB Headquarters! an amazing day to be so close to history!
What has been your favorite halloween costume?
I do actually lol, and I mean it too.
#thatawkwardmomentwhen the airport sales clerk and airline ticket agent say, "Have a good flight," and I say, "You, too."
Just finished the bday celebration! Awesome time! hooked me up! My ppl at Lucy's kept the booze flowing. Whew Lawdy!!
#Santorum: We have five weeks until a big win here in
I hate when people tell me I'm too old for cartoon. No ones too old for cartoons.
and thanks for following us!
im SO on it
Yeah me too. Thanks!!
"Team of Destiny wins it all" in Superbowl XLIV. Congrats Saints!!!! Visit us online at www.vancouverwahotel.com
RT if you love me and all ur other #MAHOMIES **EvErYdAy.HeRo<3**
Yeah I know It'd be great! :)
: Wow! Talk about taking me down memory lane...haven't heard that name in forever. Have you visited "Jimmy's" on your tr ...
Andrew Bird is the perfect sunset music at #Coachella!
I gagged, and when I realized what happened I just started throwing up, the people walking by looked at me crazy..yayyy
read more about what I'm doing
Bag of money remix coming ur way nigga
quite lovely
Thanks for the kind words!
Final day of class....
smh so i cant be friends with someone that REAL and nigga I get MONEY
Playing the Branded Saloon in Bk this Saturday from 9 - 10. It's a free show
Spending 12 hours at a hospital with an inmate...real police work.
Justin Bieber is looking so much like Kate Moennig
Hooray for Dad! Hope you guys had fun. : )
I agree. Love the movie. So sad to see that I was all alone watching it.
is it weird that Butterscotch is my favorite? That goes for pudding AND Dilly Bars
Anarchists make better lovers anyway.
shaking things up. What a day!
remember "sit. bad waverly! i said sit!" LOL times a thousand
The haters can talk all they want about Justin Bieber. But he will always have his fans that love him and support him.
TWITTER PARTY! EVERYBODY DANCE NOW!! ♫♪
Well then I've still got room for improvement! (RT currently holds 3 out of my top 5 most played songs on itunes.)
I KNOW. Hes on his man-period.
you don't look a day over 28!
europe has given me a whole new understanding of club music. i can't stop.
RT : Did u know MoMA has online course-how Abstract Expressionists painted - learn how & try it #artsed www.moma.org/courses
I guess intent is the difference and world view vs Google/Apple/CIA view. That was high art when he first did it.
good night everyone! Im gonna get busy with paper.. see you tomorrow.. same place.. uh idk what time :P
Watching the ORIGINAL Seventeen again :D
the buckeyes failing is present enough.
Damn I gotta stop at the market! This will most definitely be a quick stop!
Sigur Ros and Damien Rice not once but TWICE as interval music. HIGHPOINT WOULD NEVER MAKE ME SO DEAD.
Appropriately, today (4/14) has been declared Milwaukee Day. Suggested (and cliche) ways to celebrate? Beer & cheese. :)
Oh Letterman, making fun of North Carolina. Ouch.
no ice-cream not peach..
what time are we pregaming?
THAT was insane.
Lets get drunk
thanks for the #FF love. xoxo Ben Stock of Brainpower
RFT “: seriously if you dont like A$AP go home !”
never fails to surprise us! Check out some of her wild style in today's post!: bit.ly/mSvmh6
#Scion puts 4 seats into a tiny car and calls it iQ. Do you really want folks with such a small IQ on a highway?
iDO THE SHiT HALF OF YOU BiTCHES WiSH YOU COULD DO
Halcomb running into a chair
Obviously, no one is monitoring the feed. Wonder when/if I'll hear back from them.
please follow back Justin!!(:
I'll give you a foot massage
I will Bieber-stalk people ¬¬ are you very Kloutfluential?
good morning everybody
if you don't have something in life to be passionate about then you might as well lay down and die ;)
I don't hate black people cause they're black. I hate them because they think I hate them cause they're black.
Everyone follow my instagram my usernames collerrblhynd DO IT NOW!!!!!!!!!!!!XD
Just got home from school
Don't forget Better Book Sale Today at OCC Library!
waiting for a follow back ?
To cover up chipped polish fast,swipe on a top coat with chunky glitter. The bling will camouflage any bare spots!
We're having a great time here at
I thought that the calling limit was 12 !!!!!
Watching an episode of Family Guy from 1999 . The only thing that's sorta changed is the voices ! And a lil bit of the colors . Funny (: <3
Sadly, I didn't either. Massive migraine put me down! RT : Bummed I couldn't make it!
2 bags of clothes to donate so far ... feeling good. Just wish I could find motivation to pack when it's earlier than 10PM.
Sweet! Can't wait to hear more about your project and read your write up of me :)
I read your interview with TRT. I was so excited to find a fellow fan of The Phantom Tollboth! That book is why I write.
Money is the root of all evil, people are the reason it is evil, because they think about the evil things that want to use it for.
maybe next year... don't think i'm gonna make it this time :(
Nesrien: if you email me your zip file in the next hour I'll host it for you on my site and send you both the URL
Reeves birthday tomorrow!! :)
Nice work tonight, Brew Crew!
I need those blu rays! print traffic mike here haha
Crystal Welsh is Steve's sister,the 1 who heard about this walk,gathered a team of her closest friends,&stepped out to lead
In 1880, Richard Etheridge became the US LifeSaving Service's first Black commander when he took charge of Pea Island, NC lifesaving station
And we're off!! is under way.
The 1-cr word study class I was teaching-- today was our last day. I think they will all sleep well tonight! :)
One of those days when you have to just forget about the first half and start fresh. It's never too late for a new beginning <3
In the dr whit bristny
Going to sleep in my monkey hat... Don't judge me.
Happy New Year to all of my students! Much success in your college search process. Remember there is no ONE perfect college.
<--- Is ready to get faded
After several stops we're on our last stop now getting some to go breakfast at Jollibee then go straight home!😊👌
Wanna get on the Party Bus? Meet us at the corner of Sheffield and Belmont at 9.30 tonite! Free ride! See ya at tonite!
: I vomitted after that finals match today. What disappointment!
Stupid phone sent variations on a tweet three times. Apologies.
Thanks, James
thanks for the #FF! see you Sunday!
Way to go Avon! County Champs!<3
You've never cried to me before like this Chase..I'm on my way.. Don't make me regret this okay?
may take you up on that someday...
Thinking the #WhiteSox screwed up big time by letting Buehrle walk and signing Danks.
On side of road heading to Augusta. Pulled over so Van could wipe dog shit off boot.
Dating is exciting for both singles. A few suggestions to show them you love them:
Getting rid of AQ Status, just in time for us to have one season in the Big East...
If a back hand is discipline, and the front of a hand is abuse... then what's a karate chop?
Stupid, dumb, bitches gonna die. I find this amusing. :D
To all you moms out there, Happy Mother's Day!
Your train-y boredom has turned you into a social media monster.
Yes, that's why I said the age was fine. The feedback I get here is that I look younger than my headshot. Mid 20s early 30s.
looking forward to seeing u guys soon hope u chose my video this time miss hearing from u both xo
When are you back from nawlins??
": Why must I get hungry at this time??" Me too :/ bring me food
its filthy in the office with the music being blasted. Filthy I tell you.
Gilchrist was #3 on ESPN top plays. UNC losses. UK is #1 GO KENTUCKY!! GO BIG BLUE
yooo was up sir. We still need to link up
The 1st step in conquering the dreaded QLC is def admitting it which includes self reflection & taking control of ur own happiness!
Skylar didn't deserve to go. And I'm not just saying that because I'm from Mississippi. She's an amazing performer.
Great young work.
- Never even knew you tweeted. Will be very refreshing to have you in my twitter feed.
Lofty Dog is officially open for business at our newest location in the Village Shopping Center 2700 W Anderson Ln Ste 402. Come say hi!
Can Liver Cleanse Melt Away Pounds? How to Stop Food Cravings - 7 Tips Healthy Snacking: Which Nuts are Best?
Thank you Seattle for a great day. You are wonderful customers and friends. Have a great evening! See you tomorrow!
I only ever get money to get out of debt.
On behalf of Toast, Mika tweets :There're so many people in this country.
i really want brewer's to start offering that crab hot dog on their regular menu.
Never fails that right after #verizon calls and wants to know if I want an upgrade my #droid becomes possessed.
Don't know about that one.
1st day of spring practice!! Anxious to see who will lead this team!!
Emmanuel College wins the SSAC for the first time in school history. And, TJ Rosene is crowned SSAC Coach of the Year. Next: NAIA tourny.
#inhabitation emphasizes "the material rhetoric of abandoned houses" -- a belief in "thingamajigisms" --
one more follower till i reach 6OO :}
off-menu cocktail.
I'm checking with the various platforms whether this would delay the next user getting the book
Love Alicia Keys'
#MUSICNEWS Whitney Houston's daughter stars in reality TV series
Part of that didn't make since... but once you have your M-endorsement, we should rent motorcycles.
Solis Energy's Power HotSpots will be deployed around the track at the 12 Hours of Sebring race saturday
Hollywood: Rebooting Inspiration For Over 80 Years!
The response comes back with the 'weather' payload missing, so you could say: if response['weather']: display_weather().
used to be an excel sheet but have recently moved it to so that i can edit/check on mobile. i guess same for to-think
..."spaghetti"...it was mis spelt with an 'e', where the 'a' should have been....as regards the second re-tweet i have put on my timeline,..
I love when people sit in their car and they know u r waiting 4 their parking spot
Will be mapping curriculum to mission most of next week, so have to do ALL THE THINGS today.
WOW....! NCSU/KU {0}^8 <--- look of surprise. (w/goatee) - standing on my head.
WOW..omgg...i said that exact same thing !!! heheh :D SHOPPINGG <3
Thats what i say..
well yes and no *smiles*
:D haha I'm happy for ya .
I bought the Intellicase from and really like it. You should check that one out too.
yeah. defamation? please expound.
no tears running down my face.. (;
Very tired so I am going to go to bed. God bless everyone and remember to give your love ones a hug.
The one thing I like about going to my grandpas doctor the medcine they give me ! 😉
You are the playmaker !!
Off to a listing appt and then a pre-closing walk through... Busy day.
if you follow me ill follow you ...i swear
Having dinner *outside* on the last day of winter. If only would deliver a beer from across the street. ;-)
haha its alright and well I'm bout to be 16 so your really not off(x
And, to answer your question, you are alive, because we need you...your humor, your intelligence, your grace... :)
New position responsibility: bake sale attendant
kiss. asses. sit. down.
I agree the Obama campaign,leading the charge with negative attacks. #Character assassination is offensive among many others.
Who better than to listen to #zakkwylde while coding!
Its difficult to pray about something you don't care about. Crawford
you mean Jessica LOL
Makin a happy hour run at sonics....out of the "kindness" of my heart
aww, thanks. I do love ice cream
at least it is a cute bitch.
Sorry to my haters sorry that you couldn't phase me
Would you like to support a career development & networking group: #PWG: Provides employment retention programs!
Aint no mistaking playing or faking u got me open and waiting!
#BlogHer11 early this week my social media/networking prof said no one reads blogs anymore. Is blogging passé ?
Everybody makes mistakes.
....in our household. So prenup or no prenup; laws or no laws, the burden is for BOTH the partners/couple to pay
havent heard anything. Still pieces of car around where there used to be a sign
Proscape2 thanks for following The Hilltop on Twitter!
BREAKING: hospitalized after stroke.
Grab a #McCafé Mango Pineapple Smoothie and head outside to soak up some sun!
dont be shy silly...errbody does it!
Optimal.com card sort website and recommending Don't Make Me Think! Love this book!
Gutmann: Controlling for qualifications, the wealthy are over-represented by “an immense margin” at top institutions
my life is good!!!
well, don't lose faith in what you're doing. True artists welcome constructive critique. Then tell you why you're wrong. ;)
Still in school....
me too!
some consider him still. I have yet to see any improvement though
Piercings on guys other than their ears <<<
I just got a new staple gun and have been using it all over my room
Dani Lowe is an indie actress starring in the film, PSYCHO KILLER BLOODBATH , which won Best Horror Film Feature at AOF International Fest.
My Freaky Side Come out Around This Time LoL...
If you want to tweet about the Ethnohistory meeting, I created a hashtag,
Walked out to my car as someone was trying get in it!
holy bar fight at moosehead earlier. Thank you CIAA tourny for the entertainment
What God intended for you goes far beyond anything you can imagine. –Oprah
So....who do you think stole the show at last nights "Guitars & Stars" concert?!
I love the chirpity-chirp of the birds this morning. Yea Spring!!
TY Ryan! ... I hope you heal up before heading out to Hawaii! :) J
Where can I send you some info about us?
NOT funny. Plus the Vikings probably won't even be a franchise in 2020 :)
That just gave me chills. Freese is a stud.
Lev Manovich is blowing my mind.
i couldnt do it :( i was pissed off but i couldnt do it hahah
i just don't understand how that "ruined" the movie.
and I say your welcome♥
A personal espresso machine.
#GoodMorning this had to be the softest bed I've ever slept in!
Lets Load up the Plane! Bye-bye #NewYork! Its been fun! Now back to the #Grind in the
that sounds like my version of hell.
iBooks Author makes a proprietary format, but based on EPUB, so somewhat positive. Not much social yet, hoping they extend scripting!
Remember when Josh was fat?
New song called "Smoke One" up Now!!! Peep this track and holla back. Peace
20 yrs ago we anticipated a surge in crime that never came. Shouldn't we change our policies to make up for that mistake?...
Big thanks to for speaking with us at HQ today
Thanks for the heads up!
Cuddling with my pillow & blanket & listening to Robin Thicke <3
Sometimes people just won't leave well enough alone.
Thank's guys for all the #FF's and shoutouts will make sure to return them all soon x
That would be good. I've written about genetics and it's kind of a moving target. So much discovery happening all the time!
I miss neighborhood night games... Those were the days
i cant use chopsticks :( i feel lame with my fork and spoon. hahah :'D
??? this appeared on your screen?
The #Rays and #RedSox matchup is something else. 7 runs across for Boston in the 8th...and still no outs. Not happy I took the
Agreed. It was hard to get out of bed this morning.
Whenever someone says not to edit their photos I feel the compulsion to draw penises on their photos just to spite them.
you should mix it with Sakiri vodka, you will love it!
more good news. i tell ya, this is just making my day.
yes! Be careful, it might change your life lol - RT BABY MONKEY riding on a pig
Give us a try next time. We can provide an oil change service for most vehicles in about 20 minutes.
What the hell does a busker look like
Whatever! Whatever! I do what I want! I sleep with the homeless!
that's pretty much why I keep my ironing board under the bed and never use it.
Quality Tweeps to follow! CHEERS KAFE CASTRO style! *clink*
Awake USF! It's graduation day!
so sleepy
I have decided I am going to train for the flying pig half marathon, I haven't decided whether it will be the 2012 or 2013 flying pig
I love when people have their read receipts on, but I don't have mine on cuz I always forget to respond and I don't want them hating me
I think i have gained myself a little crush deep inside.<3
lakes up over 20 last I checked late 4th
Awesome, you'll have to teach that trick.
"the minute you think of giving up, think of the reason why you held on so long" 💙
This day is turning out to be the worst%$#@
The thing is, when she falls, she falls hard, and no matter how many times she says i don't care... she really does
Did pop punk save your life ?
"The possibilities are endless, the task is to identify and work with team players only...
Staged readings! Short commitment, GREAT networking, and you may just find yourself in the next big hit!
Dell has expanded its partnership with Goodwill Industries in the U.S. to another 319 locations. – Texas Tech Pulse, Environmental Leader
My brand loyalty to is being stretched to the max.
Good design goes to heaven; bad design goes everywhere. — Mieke Gerritzen
Pullin up to Tri-Cities High school prom w/ performing tonight! #YMMG TURN UP!!!!"
thanks, we look forward to having you. Will definitely read your report
nice pic!! Love u & Ali so much❤ it would mean soo much if u followed me on instagram -pibkglitter758! I love all ur pics!
If you know anywhere I can win free #MuppetMovie tickets, don't hesitate to enter my name a few thousand times
wyd tonight? c:
RT : it's time to call it a night! Lol<<HA
RT : Change from striving to be successful to trying to be useful - Jim Collins
Is she/he doing ? If the space is open in October we want to have "ride ready" clinics.
First tweet I read is depressing... Nice twitter. Lmfao
Finally a success..
on wifi, had to turn the phone off and then turn it back on. I've been having to do that a lot lately. hm damn 4s
Tonight at we bring you hometown hero with opening support from Seneca, Ben Brown, Zizala, and Ray T!
going to avec and publican....anything new i should try?
Yeah man, it's time to defeat 7 evils exes
It doesn't take much to cheer me up.
#NewOrleansBowl 4th and goal at the 3 for ULL. Timeout, decision time! Mud dogs, mud dogs...
i know where, its a secret :) pack your truck amigo....Dan Banks and the Horse Pickers
no I'm not home I'm at school and in probably goin to Mexico
Doing a tinychat tomorrow from 7-9 EST so make plans to stop on by! haha
This is gonna be a great week for me and my family. It's already written. I can feel the spring breeze coming.
Putting my $ where my mouth is; I like RB Toby Gerhart. I got him for $8 / $200 Budget.
Good morning young world
no one cares.................... (yanks at shirt collar slightly to gesture something awkward)
hahahahahahahaha, this bull shit i'm getting fed
stop by The Bar! Happy hour from 4-6 EVERYDAY! Located off of St Rose & Bermuda
Review: This feeling of peace continues through the entire book, even when the active is thick and heavy. This was such a treat.
Water shut off to KFA, CSH & Rodli Hall on Tues, May 1, from 9 am-noon due to the Cascade Project. Contact Facilities Management at 3827.
Any pools open today? It's gonna be a hot one.
OMG RIP Carlos Fuentes (I know I'm a day late...)
Time for cardio, pa rum pum pum pum. Don't wanna do it now, pa rum pum pum pum. But don't wanna be a fat cow, pa rum pum pum pum. Ho-hum.
finally put a picture of herself unedited! 😳
Expecting great things as ALWC gets ready to worship our GREAT GOD this morning at 1030. Finishing our #WINNING series up
Whatever the woman cooks.. :)
#incollege i met a lot of lames
I hate feeling like crap.
CHECK OUT THE WORLDWIDE TRENDS!!!!! #600KMAHOMIES <3 SO PROUD OF YOU, :)
Nope, I was at Leahs. But I made it to work on time :)
Welcome back Trekkies and Jedi's alike for #ComicCon 2011. We don't pick sides.
Is Vince McMahon watching this?
I don't need the class! LOL, boss thought I might bring techniques back to my preso class!
I know how to spot a fool, they dont ever shut up.. if you speak it you don't know it.. if you know it you don't speak it..
Great deals going on now....stop by to choose your new floors!!!!
oh my...of course! It's a wonder Apple hasn't done a story on you yet. #iphoneobsessed :)
I don't think it matters what day you do it on as long as you get one long run in a week. I often have to do mine on Friday!
does it also come with a referral to a cardiologist?
Live tweet at the today using
#VH1Divas is off to a great start
Simple #vegetarian breakfast #recipe Cheerios with Coconut Milk and for a snack... #Love Crunch!
I hope you stopped at the Driftwood Inn in St. Ignace. Some of the best chicken wings I've ever had.
And many of em RT don't watch HS football, so I'd be game for USAFA CFB games on Friday nights. Great tickets available I bet
Woohoo, that's a wrap! Shooting the new video took 30 hours in two days, but it's going to be great - I'll post some pics soon.
All the 'coming up' announcements sounded like threats
Moved onto the second Body Count alb, "Born Dead." Iceberg sounds pretty intimidating through a pitch shifter.
I'll take our liar over theirs any day RT : The head coaches in the 2011 Sugar Bowl...Oy...
Small world. Just went to a German-Turkish-friendship-buildin-feel-good journo thing last weekend with those folks
See our discussion from this weekend so far
We are looking for the hippest online Muslim fashion and accessories stores in USA & Canada please suggest them here!
Polish Festival yesterday, today! Yay, #toledo!
Style is whatever makes you feel however you want to feel at that moment!
If you can change one thing about today's government, what would it be?
yes, i want.
Good to see MMJ in attendance.
If Turner develops like we think he can
Folks, it was almost 50 degrees today...ice NOT safe. At least 2 of 4 teens fall through out at Washington park walking across lagoon.
Im Hearin Wale's New Album Is Live!!!! I heard some of it today so Ima Go Get A Copy Tomorow Then....I Support Good Music
Pre-Cal and Economics are the only classes we're still doing work in 😒
Long lazy sunday, back to work monday!
Gotta study for this exam tomorrow
Hahahahah of course, Idk what I thought that was gonna be on
U kno U love this life can't nobody do U like me..eventho I never showed U what I can really do...ain't nobody outdoing me #past or present
Florida bats, anytime you'd like to wake up that'd be awesome.
Q; Would I ever twitter date? A; Depends who it is..
Put your face all in the pussy
Don't catch a felony swagger jackn lol
i wonder what i'm doin tonight..
A good guy is really hard to find:/ unless you're or Then you are perfect!:D hope both of ur days are going well!
Well, the music portion of SXSW may actually be close to that!
Friday 5pm yeah that's right it's Martini time. The weekend starts now!
like when the easter bunny hides your basket from you?
it's a perfect time!
I would guess will probably address this at some point later today.
A delayed welcome to DC!!! Though it looks like you're finding most of the great places on your own.
What are your plans for #2012 ??
I know, intense right? ;)
you're fat and wear a push up bra. dumb slut
Last night's M&G at Tom Foolery's was incredible!!!
Dear CF & GP. Did you get more lights for the bigger studio or will I need to turn up the brightness on my TV... again.
Looking forward to mentor event tonight. It still amazes me that these amazing industry leaders give their time. So grateful!
profanity? My my. I will see you guys later.
Champaign for my real friends!
#MyPastRelationships suck. #sowwy need a good boy in my life.
#mudmelt Melanie Kehoss: two views of tech&art.one tech is behind the scenes. The other tech is the art.
No problem my man, I mean it 100%. Just enjoy your youth for the time being and it will come, it will come when you least suspect
what is going on with the red sox man?
mn i done had a headache all day
Spencer you're the best and... i love you <3
4 down 12 to go...that is all. gonna get some much needed sleep
Bella ripped the carpet up trying to escape out of one of our bedrooms. =( I hope I can fix it! I wish I had hardwood floors!
just applied! very excited! perhaps i will be on the #brewcrew . is there a confirmation? i dont seem to be getting one
i am like so cracked out on this coffee that i didn't even realize my IPOD was playing hardstyle. umm wtf lmao!!!!!!!!!!
GREAT lunch with mom for mothers day...check. #Pop-N-LockBeatMix for San Antonio and the U.S.....check. Visit with my grandma...check!
Its that time again #WalkingDead on
Perfect-yes plz
good girl for taking it. It will make you smarter than you already are. ;-)
You can type apostrophe by swiping upwards from the comma key. Give it a shot!
3000th tweet goes to :)
Support Epilepsy awareness research and acceptance! Wear purple or a purple ribbon March 26th, start a conversation, educate.
Note to Self: Life is not static. Static is boring.
follow limit :(
thanks for telling your friends to check us out!
This was the best Hulk even better than me when I was in second grade.
Exactly. Purpose must be to get the characters to an HEA to make it a romance.
ASAP keep your ear to the ground...
last time i checked its called the scoreboard not the triple double board. Hes the least assertive freak athlete ever
Anyone ever play the card game Fluxx? 1st time I played was last night. So fun. Actually nice to play a card game other than poker for once!
24 people.... 2 tribes.... But only one winner... Who will be the Survivor?!?!? O_o
Our full website will launch next week. In the meantime, what kind of topics would like to cover?
Let kids/students catch a mistake you make speaking.Conveying this info, a way great to develop expressive language skills.catch mine?
thanks ru bang bang
I have full confidence you'll do it. I plan to help.
nothing much you? :)
Aww, thanks Matt. Lovely to hear.
Sounds great! Will do.
good morning Juicy
How Yu Like That ? :p .
Here's my facebook page. Someone told me this is the cool, happening new thing to do, so here goes.
Who is watching the NFL Draft?! Who do you think the #Niners #49ers will pick?!
You at the Michigan football meetup? RockitChicago tweeted the Hoke is there and I saw you're drunk already.
app that famm
#Aries are easily seduced if you let them think they have all the control in the bedroom. Let them lead the way & they will plz u to no end!
QOTD: What is your favorite song?
Droped the baby off at school/whent to see an old room mate/back 2 the house 2 make the wife breakfast/kiss her off 2 work she gos muahh : )
Surprise surprise - there's a show about Nazis on the History Channel.
When in doubt, freak em out.
her lips like clips that go in a nine lol that's my shit
I am in malibu so not dealing with traffic but thanks for all the love you rock
Coconut greek yogurt and coconut water were purchased in my house today
this is so funny/weird. Who made it?
It is easier to write an indifferent poem than to understand a good one.
Well, I'm almost done with the preconference at #TXLA12. Interesting stuff. Conf. Welcome Party in half an hour.
what did you like about the Raven?
This month there will be a solo piano performance at F. Scott's Monday the 20th. I will be needing to unleash some of my jazz angst.
Since I raised a child and worked, does that mean I had two careers?
See, my problem is there's no principle here. Instead it's 'Subject X offends me, therefore it must remain forbidden'.
Anyone taking advantage of the ticket vouchers we gave out thanks to Kroenke Sports Enterprises tonight? nuggetsvsknicks.com
#condescendingConnor "Google? Pffft! I guess, if you have to, but I already know everything there is to know on the web"
RT : Tea Party claims Madison rally drew 6,200 Saturday. Cool. If we're using that calculus, the "Reclaim Wisconsin"...
Tried the winning-a-championship thing. Didn't work out. Check out my animated series, The Lebrons. Won't work either, but still! :)
It's imprtnt 4 Tchrs to personalize learning. how can the student learn what type of learner they are with #tech tools
I am tweeting cuz told me to.
We spent an hour or two last night perfecting our hushpuppies recipe. Watch for them on the starter menu!
dude... Rude.
People can be so weird..love public transit..
how often does the positive of social learning get run over by reality of high stakes testing
Bulls needed ALOT this series.
Your 'precious detail' is my comedy gold. Eli is such a fun character to root for.
First dissection in biology tomorrow. I heard they dissect cats in anatomy, I wonder if they take donations.
=] happy happy!
Hahaha the judges on dancing with the stars are arguing with each other..this is funny
Almost done my new song I started Wednesday- excited:)
Early voting for City of Milwaukee residents now through Fri, Mar 30th,M-F, 8:30-4:30 pm
I'm so pumped for 's new album!!! I love Justin Bieber <3
Thank you. I was just leaving to jump on the 408. I guess Colonial wins.
New girl t-shirts in all colors also ladies we have those levi shorts so you can show off your legs this summer.
---- today it is supposed to friggin' awesome!
It's cool when verified accounts that I don't follow or tweet follow me
Wuddup i remember last year i performed at the dub last year tryna win 1 of ya beats and alladat dat nite was crazy
Hourly work dilemma: feeling sick, but don't want to forfeit a day's pay!
will you please follow?
nice article on lip care! Thanks!
omg dude. Cute flirting with my girlfriend k? Ok.
However I do love that it is tshirt and shorts weather here and in Cleveland it was jeans and winter coat weather
nope never heard of em, I'm stubborn when it comes to listening to local artist...that's something I gotta work on tho
RT : . for event on innovation & technology in/for #WesternMa w/ & others
That's pretty cool! I was on a reality show called Fightskool 2 and Tito Ortiz came to train with us as well as Frank Mihr
I wonder what it's like to have a tail
Finals are over! Yeah!
welcome to twitter
-&- Thank God For Wakingg Me Up This Morningg.
It's on a Friday! :)
TreSean wuzz her . And he's much better than Colton.
Driving through Brookfield there seems to be a pro Waller sign in yard of every giant ranch house. Makes sense, I guess.
We are all travelers in the wilderness of this world, and the best that we can find in our travels is an honest friend.
Continuing through IN, KY, OH 4 the BE PREPARED AMERICA 2011 US TOUR! Be ready for major disasters, America, wherever in this land you live!
Vogelsong agrees, walks him on a 3-2 pitch; the problem there is now Ryan's gotta deal with Troy Tulowitzki
My dream holiday, free Yogurtland this Monday. I'm thinking of skipping work to honor the froyo.
I swear I was thinking about that yesterday!
Good morning, back to work
Wow I just got this emailed to me: "Congratulations! You’ve been chosen to Test & Keep Hunting Products."
That's why I sprang for the full passport. Sorry you're not in Canada.
Looking forward to meeting you & all the other interns this summer!
": lmao you know im your favorite person in fourth!! duh" nope is! Lol
Thanks Ray.
Taked to my cousin Rose Long and sister Fay. Had a great time. Cynthia Harris
Just submitted artscape proposal for ambitious collaboration... Keeping fingers crossed!
We've got $2 #LabattBlue tall boys for all you #hockey fans today! All 3 games will be shown here tonight!
looking like a good night for KARAOKE at The Safehouse and 3 Lions Pub :)
All i can hope for is that after this while girl, i hope that you smile when you see me
Nice!! Can't wait!
Its not real, its never real I see the fiend in your eyes.
I would miss being announced home coming princess because i was in the bathroom #talent :)
Hey! I just realized you changed your name....are you cruising this year?
yeah, it only took me all night to figure that out... my genius is showing now
Feeling the 2:30pm crash? (I was) My military friend told me to do pushups to wake up and it works! #GetDown&GiveMe20
.. and that mixtape is coming real soon.. Sept. 5 to be exact.. look out for it
OLLU Men's Golf - Finished 3rd of 8 @ ROUND 1 -- Grub Mart Invite hosted by Jacksonville State @ Silver Lakes in Jacksonville, Ala.
you're the one for me. ♥
OMGG ALEX IM GOING TOO!!!!! WHICH ONE DO YOU GO TOO ????? :DD <3 #yee 7
tweet tweet tweet I don't know what I'm saying either but I'm for sure on twitter
Harden with the KO punch to the Dallas ponies #NbaChumpions FTM!!!
Thanks for the follow Love Second Time (lovesecondtime)! :)
I always want to do my best to preserve our environment and now I can get it all shipped to my house for FREE
haha well now you're gonna make me blush! I knew you were gonna make me blush!
Got tickets to "The Best Man" on Bway with Angela Lansbury & Candice Bergen AKA JESSICA FLETCHER AND MURPHY BROWN ON STAGE TOGETHER OMG DEAD
Thank you very much! :)
I used love you guys! I used to buy shoes all the time from you guys in law school. You lost many styles I liked.
was expecting a pic of Vincent Pastore
If you a barber, and you bald... I definitely am not getting cut up by you.
I'm in Atlanta in a big ass house all alone with every single light on and flash lights by the conner of each room
thank you or tuning in :)
#Kansas isn't looking to hot.
Me too. Best #adoration chapel in Des Moines area. I haven't seen them all, but I doubt any other is even close.
The brand of candy, duh..
You have to love us :]
hopefully J.J. will be directing an episode as well.
Chief to Padron's parents "Thank you for giving us your son."
Almost able to get some new colors (finally) on Any recommendations? I'm thinking Mardi Gras...
Its on Netflix.
how are the birth control splint doing?
looked at those pics you're talking about, and then as the trending topic goes
70% of mobile users live in the developing world.
12. K-Rod thought process: / let the scrubs get on bases / then strike out Matt Kemp!!!
I could live with that...Rather go Silatou and then trade up for Kendricks...but what do I know lol
David, thank you so much!! It's such a pleasure to help steward ! Glad you are having an amazing RISE Week! :)
Accomplishing the impossible means only that the boss will add it to your regular duties. ~ Anonymous
Getting hit in the head with a volleyball <<<
i think i had it SMACKIN! lastnite
#YouWasCuteUntil you took your contacts out!
We just learned the body of a missing Colorado hiker has been found in the Gila. Details on KOB at 10.
We have to STOP, LOOK, LISTEN, WAKE UP, and BE ABOUT IT!
Carson Palmer to the Raiders??? Stay tuned.....
sandwich planning, grocery shopping, and food prepping is pretty much all I did yesterday!
omg who thinks would be a good name?;D
The best actor in Hollywood!!!! hahahahahah! :) :) :)
THINGS ARE NOT ALWAYS WHAT THEY SEEM... These 2 little dogs have given me a much deep understanding... Continued next tweet
her grandfather a few weeks ago :(
beautiful day to play hooky myy ladies😊☀
when crystal castles starts your shuffle off, it's going to be a good day.
talkin' bout bbq... Do you smoke brisket ever? Made my first successful 1 using a hi heat method. how do you brisket?
Thanks for the shout out, guys!
lol how r u ?
Looking forward to the Bare Naked Ladies concert poolside at Red Rock tongiht!
I miss saying mark zuckerberg-esque things that I used to at my old job. "I'm the only one in this building capable of doing this work"
waiting to get on the pkane to texas lls
Wasn't that enough? RT Matthew Broderick...He hasn't done anything worth watching since Ferris Bueller's Day Off.
ooh. <3 that book. Let me know if the film version is worth it.
Bud Light might taste like piss, but Here We Go dog commercial is pretty damn funny.
I don't feel safe walking in Gary, Indiana
Gravity hurts.
I'm already writing it up in my head; comforting to know there's a place to at least get a publication out of it.
RT In April, #Obama2012 raised $43.6 million across committees. Thanks to everyone who pitched in.
That new trailer from last night blew me away. So ready.
Bitch you shoulda never tried some stupid shit like that you know them type of dudes don't play. Fuck is wrong wit you
Boom! Yes, Seamus shouldn't distract from the real issues! RT : Agreed...I think history of...
I heard you died. Is that true?
Believe in life and #neversaynever life is worth it!!!
oh no! Lil Gucci?
I'm diggin tats!
I love the charade of watching congress applaud calls to reform their own corrupt, unethical, & self-interested fecklessness.
sorry to hear about your spring break at the hospital. Take care!
Hey all - broadcasting live in 15 minutes from WCUW 91.3 FM Worcester MA or www.wcuw.org streaming live- Jewish music.
may the odds be ever in your favor
People beween the ages of 18-49 your demographic means more to advertisers than real #s You're enabling a load of bad shit just by watching
printing panthers.
alright well than take care of the situation .
raf simons, rick owens is usually what i’m dressing eeen.
I think that if you purchase a product from a Co. they should be reponsible to pay for return fees if damaged,do you guys feel the same????
Ran the Madison mini in 1:45 today. Right at goal pace. Very proud of Kim's 2:15.
That's what I was afraid of. I wanted to clarify the scope and was hoping I didn't have to send to each person. Got it done though.
Thank U 2 Chefs Joachim Splichal
"Will wonders never cease?"- Houdini. For the sake of museums we hope they never do.
Storms+track meet=grumpy makala.
Hey You: What are you doing this Thursday night? Come hear The Gravel Spreaders at 4th St Tavern in San Rafael.
You're welcome. Good Luck.
its one of my favorites!
damn you
Good for you!! What goes around comes around!
I'm doing some research on options for social content aggregation, curation, and display. Would love to connect with you ASAP!
I wish you would remember that when you insult me, you're not telling me anything I haven't already told myself a hundred times.
I get back on Saturday home slice!
"In fiction, diagnosis is reductive" -- Egan
just spared myself 250$ thank you i #loveyou…he's a life saver
Great game today. Our guys really have taken a step to becoming an "elite" program. We gotta keep moving forward not backwards.
House Ed Chair Massey says "We still have 26 witnesses left."
I have softball 2 night, but I'll see if I can fit it in.
It's supposed to be hard! If it wasn't hard, everyone would do it. The hard... is what makes it great! Tom Hanks - A League Of Their Own
Yes. But I didn't train. I will be letting my corporation down with my subpar race time.
CHARGING!!!! And a 3pg dagger before that. Oh my
I'd never be on a reality show, but only because I wouldn't want my mom to see the faces I make when I'm talking to her on the phone
Studying abroad this summer or fall? We're looking for bloggers! If you're interested, please let us know!
Great game, yesterday. What's it like competing for both the number 1 team in NCAA D1 BBall and #teamnosleep?
You r the best !
i'm starting dance classes! Can i have a good luck?
"Sometimes good is not enough."
#incaseyoudidntknow there is not a damn thing to watch on T.V right now
Dear Elisabet. I just read your 2002 article on Jane Roberts/ Seth. Brilliant. It's an honor to follow you
Sounds a bit like a cop out. Do we really think that with 1/4 of US kids not graduating from HS that 1/4 of parents are unfit?
I am not gona hope for a good day today...I am gona make SURE today is a good day!
Why do I stay up so late, when I know I have to get up at 6 for school
Second best line: My wife says to me..."the model is wearing a $6000 dress" me: "I'm wearing like $20"
Hey stop talking over the presidents speech. Rather here him than your commentary. Thanks.
Stop trying to stay in the picture if you're not needed.
I. Am. Encoding. Film. (like, for the 5 billionth time already.)
Bizarre, but I think being introverted helps. Working w/ kids is taxing, but not like working w/ adults. Hats off to you too!
Well I said I missed you. I want my Boo.
So glad my hotel has ESPN2, so I can watch this #Timbers game!
I strongly disagree. RT : Did you watch him the entire series, 1 good game, Marc a much better player right now
You never peel crawfish if they are cooked properly. 1. Break head 2. Bite flesh 3. Pinch tail
do u know any website i can download a free beat maker
always jacking the swag
you down in Florida?? Heading down in a couple weeks for a softball tourney. We Could use you haha
Never try to explain yourself to yourself.
- We're excited to have you! Your very own pair of geek glasses is ready and waiting for you here in Herndon. ;)
TO THE MOTHERFUCKER THAT BRIKE INTO MY BOYS CAR. YOU ARE A FUCKING PUSSY SHOW YOUR FUCKING FACE LIKE A FUCKING MAN AND GET WATS COMING! R/T
RT : RT RT : Distance is just a test to see how far love can travel.
I hate Finals!
#ExpertVisibilityTip: Are your materials consistent with your brand? PowerPt templates? Soc media profiles? Nametags? Videos?
just did i spent my whole life in jersey an work was hard too find
thank you much!
*cries* RT : Once they traded him away the Lakers hopes at another ring walked out with him
Almost to 400!
yeah. I have a fanpage also, but I post the same content in both places.
Little girls can be scary... #WhatDidTheySee?
I'm feeling guddddd.....
take a letter grade off for not following instructions and grade what is there by normal standards!
I love my mother <3.
Why twitter tripping
Is It Juss Me Or Does Get Bomber && Bomber Everyday??? IKnow It's Not A Word But That's The Only Word That Can Describe Him <3
RT : SET never disapoints thank you for a great night, as usual!! :)
Looking forward to an evening w/ my girl , a DeMaio supporter. No hating here. That's how we supporters roll.
You are most welcome.
i will! assuming you will be as well, lets grab a drink like its a party in drews backyard
As they come in. I think we are doing pretty good for March! TONS of great shows coming this summer.
damn...cancer sucks.
Unbelievable. Yauch would be pissed. MT : The Sendak documentary has been pulled from YouTube for copyright claim by
practice went well today. i hope everyone is ready for our shows! new faces. same sweet tunes :)
Romney adviser says he can hit "reset button" on his conservative positions in fall "almost like an Etch A Sketch." aka Americans are dumb
Another great evening at the track... Not to hot, not to cold, and perfect for motorcross!
Why so smiley?
My grandma should check me out and take me shopping c:
“I’m Don Cornelius, and as always in parting, we wish you love, peace and soul!” -Don Cornelius
YOU look amazing!!!! You've always been simply GORGEOUS but honey that dress is STUNNING on you (btw, I'm a sz 10 too!)
I think we're on to something!
Inspired you'll make it from Oz, girl! In gratitude to you all for #musePhD. #MW2012 is spring term break here...m
when did you come to the twitter world? I'm impressed!
We need to use them LOL Iginla is my favorite NHL player but I hope he gets traded to a Stanley Cup team so he can win! :]
he actually doesn't know it's a
Laundry day for me! Not a fan of doing laundry. But I am a Fan of clean Clothes! Lol
We have to do something between #ComposerChats!
Yes, my wife packs several days in advance for an overnight trip!
I know! I needed that card this morning for my fellow commuters but it's kind of had to deliver a card in traffic :)
ok. Just got on green belt metro.
We wish! At a benefit. Soon we shall convene the nerding, Sir.
My presets fucked up. And I forgot how good Faction is.
they r still old... doesn't say much about the Knicks
Who's ready for Christmas?! IM NOT :(
I regret failing 8th grade and not doin shit in highschool cause id be graduating in a couple days I would have to go get my ged..
Sorry Deceased
The hoaxy subject lines of the Canadian pharmaceutical spam emails are so much more polite than all the other ones.
Grabbing Smoke Out Conversations, today after work. Grabbing the cd with the shirt, wish i would have it signed though!
your his girlfriend are you not ? She ain't stupid to fuck that up
I was like 9/10 when it came to questions about my gf ! The only thing i got wrong is that she wants to go to wack ass UT :p
I liked it a lot!! So many people are hatin though.
#21CRadio is tomorrow night at 6pst! Join the discussion for a chance to win tix!
So I need to know where my peeps are at! I'm in Hall 5 waiting for B. Thurston. Who's here?
Reading your tweets from yesterday, and I'm not ashamed to admit that I liked Jackie O's retrospective! I found it interesting!
She never accepts responsibility for anything. She claims if we recorded our conversations I'd be mortified but if anyone else saw the way
The guy on the left might actually change my feelings toward contrast collars. Classy. And the angled clip? Pro.
If u follow us, ur an O's fan. It should be YOUR personal mission to help us #packtheyard. Recruit. Spread the word. Make a difference.
We sold out of vendor space!
It's awkward when a gay citizen doesn't support marriage equality.. You do have the right to your own opinion, but maybe you're confused :)
Watching Reds pregame show.. They mentioned UK coaches being at game and you could hear lots of cheers in background
you're crazy!
Dude.... french fries inside a burrito... mind-blowing
Damn havnt bin on dis for a long wile aha
Awesome meeting Jamie Castro (casts Greys Anatomy) today...so pretty and nice...great name too!
I changed? I'm the same person I've always been, except I trusted you before
so it turns out it was another issue with Zendesk.. boo. We didn't get notifications for your ticket, but it's working now :)
have you ever wondered why the sun lightens our hair, but darkens the skin...
I've only been a couple of times, but I really liked their Burgundy Burger
Bowlers, how close have you made it to a perfect 300 game? Meet a kid who did it and he was playing with pain at 5:30
No matter how bad things are u guys NEVER GIVE UP!!! EVER!!! We all belong here for a reason & a season :-)
me too
* Dreams are unrealistic, impractical, demanding -- & absolutely essential to living a rich and fulfilling life. *
Thanks for the follow just started working with an #SEO company, Ill be learning from your feed.
Our mascot is a vengeful God
TONIGHT WE ARE YOUNG SO LET'S SET THE WORLD ON FIRE
okay sweet tizz
Waiting for coffee to brew. Starting work at 6am on a Saturdays is not fun.
very true, I just see them winning at least one at home. I hope they win 4 lol
Yes its over now i can finally watch my Lakers
My girls would love to be at the flea market at
Good morning :)
drawback working #TheodoresOriginal #HotDogs this wknd: onion-smelling hands … but it was worth it. don't forget to stop by Union & Walden!
you mean Eazy-E?
“: Looks like I might get back on the Internet more lol... Still thinking bout deleting the Facebook, who knows” ..should he??
Omg Jennifer Lopez is sing kinda good. Tf
in fact i am now unfollowing you.
it is your world, I am just merely living in it.
Let me know if you think of others!
I want to go to the next bulls game just to say I have been to one
Jen Cole: "what's important about the fringe fesival is that you have the opportunity to form a new audience"
We are at meeting with some folks from Wichita State University about a communications panel we'll be on tomorrow.
Cher Lloyd is my favorite person.
Round 2 is almost completed. Ai is the leader at -11, followed by SH Kim, NYC, and Inkster.
THAT TWEET WASN'T ABOUT NATALIE HOLY SHIT. it was about my friend Jordan chill the hell out with that!
Honestly would not be as upset if the jacket was just listed as sold-out, but it wasn't. I paid for it and was not contacted.
Good night my dear followers
AWESOME RT Just got off the phone with Cherie Currie "The Runaways"
“: Gatorade is so so so much better than cocaine. Fuck drugs except for weed if you consider that a drug”wise words from David
I'm a bit ashamed of saying this but Bridesmaids was great (for a rom-com). It's like a female version of "The Hangover".
Lots to do today but I wanna hang out with my boo!
do u still need one?
Thank You ! <3
see my tweets with
Yea, and a little scary, TBH.
I don't follow NCAA football enough to know who the rest of these kids are, hope they get a job. & Packers don't pick any thugs
Ahh, here I thought you got a sweet photo-op. oh well :)
Nah for real, yall really let that man call himself Metta World Peace! I'm not gonna let that slide. YALL let him do that. Lol
thanks 4 the awesome show in sf last nite! I even bought the puppies tshirt frm ur bro matt. I wanted 2 say hi 2 u but 2 shy
should make you happy to be at espn where food is important. Million dollar question: how is the food at Bristol cafeteria?
Do you fight for my gay friends? My atheist friends? My Muslim friends? My Jewish friends? No. You want control everyone. Ick.
At mutt lynch's in Newport!! Love this place!!!!
Spanish project...check. English paper...barely started. Lord help!!!!
Happy no pizza at #DevIgnition. Hopefully some sandwiches with no cheese
My roommate is a robot...don't ask how I know...
I like the syntax too. When 1st starting the line-endings are tricky for folks not running Flymake. Tooling problem?
Whoever said nothing is impossible never tried slamming a revolving door.
RT Hanging at Nice. ;) does a fab job on the #cocktail menu.
Pres. Obama 1st president in U.S. history to make #veteran#homelessness a priority of his administration with 5 yr. plan to end homelessness
I can't survive on Twitter alone, I need my FB!
So there are jobs I cannot apply at until my balance at UH is 0.00. That is the rule. The law. I was hoping they could be a little kinder
It looks like he just dropped it.
Know any DMV area photographers ??
special shout out to the lovely ladies and gentlewomen of #teamlesbian <3 have a great day everyone
I haven't held an actual conversation with him in 2 weeks.
Lord, I pray that You will remove hatred, grievances or any unforgiving feelings in my heart that I have towards anyone.
Malinowski: Syrian sent to Bahrain to be a cop and taking his aggression out on "Assad Supporters"
You can come by on your way home it's on the way! We have shots of Tequila Lime on deck.
you can count?
That puts Hamilton on pace for 80. (He won't hit 80.)
where is she going??
Today's Special: Triple Play Burger: 3-1/3 lb Sirloin Patties, 3 Slices of Cheese, Tartar, Leaf Lettuce, Tomato & Red Onion w/ Side - $14.
YES. so worth it
Got into the master's program, got my halloween costume, and rented my books for the term. bring it on grad school :)
Here's a thought: rehearse your reaction to rejection.
The slips, trips and falls video I had to watch for work was the highlight of my morning.
Follow now
just had a little nap:D
psh whatever. priceless engraving. has that librarian ever found cat murder puns? i bet they haven't.
It was not I who hurt u. It was you who hurt me. But know that I am not sorry, I do not mourn of this. That it showed me who you really are.
wanna follow me?(:
My weekend starts today (YaY)
Improvised--- no matches or candles for my friend's son's Bday cake. Step up: Iphone zip lighter match on my iphone. Kids loved it!
hi! Lol yep I'm good like that
I LOVE YOU MORE! Deff need to hang out soon :)
FYI by the way that sentence is worded, it sounds like Tom Brady held hands w/ Katy Perry after holding hands w/ Giselle.
Look dude, be thankful you have someone to remind you theres a night time. ;)
Dear #chicagotraders No, I don't actually think you could teach a room full of third graders. But it would be funny to watch.
#notguilty #shocked wonders what the jury know we don't, Jose Biaz & team just became legends.
RT : do you touch up and style weaves?<<yes
My colleague Maria Gäde presents her work on multilingual access to #europeana now at #etech11 - interesting results from log file analysis
his first attempt is next year. He will get accommodations but I am nervous. :-(
The business schools reward difficult complex behavior more than simple behavior, but simple behavior is more effective - Warren Buffett
Hell Naw bro I didn't even know im there tho
...At least now I know who I can have tear the pictures up of me and Ron, if something were to happen between us.
damn kids and their "injuries." Craig Ramsey played with 3 broken legs at once!
Collab album with vanila ice maybe
excuse me, miss?
How about a follow lovely ? xx
#interviewtip DGE: if you are not told what to wear for your interview, always OVER-dress. It looks wayy better than being under-dressed!
A-Rod with a bunt single. I'll take it
Andrew Bynum's starting to look like a crackhead. What's wrong with him? Smh
Not at all.... phone got taken away:/
8-5 lost. no don't worry penguins Pittsburgh likes to lose. We dont like winning. Go ahead and lose every playoff game since your at it.
Who wants to see a baby pic of me!?
i don't follow. monopolies don't exist in private sector. and collective bargaining is not a given.
Alan Carr: "So Harry did you take a trip down Madison's avenue?"
dadyj told me u were fierce...And i have to work it...To keep up!!
": score a lot of goals tomorrow and beat RSL, alright?" And clean sheet too!
Vanilla! :P
Yes- I was telling her to talk to Leo, he has the gift to gab... and makes a hell of a drink /cc
Haha nice! Congrats! =) I'm moving on into my 3rd year in the fall. :o
event***. Its a movie that a journalism student from Towson directed.
Let's see how many times I can watch sportscenter in a row
Oh I was misinformed it was MCA not AD ROCK, still just as devastating. I'm really feeling old now, I hope these young heads appreciate him.
muncie till race weekend come see me
what the actual fuck. i'm gonna cry. i have like 3 songs in my head now.
i could fuck with this weather for the rest of my life. <3
Maybe if they turned the economy off and then turned it back on it might run better. Works for my computer....
thx for the love and support!
RT : Great seeing everyone at the Studio D Microsoft offsite today.
On the menu for tonight: 5 v 5 soccer games for the boys in Boynton Beach and an assessment in Delray.
my umbrella keeps flipping upside down
I'm about to be a guest critic at an art school critique... fun to be back in this context.
Looking forward to the Manny Pacquiao vs. Margarito fight! Pacman should dominate per usual.
So tired!
I need to show you something awesome! :)))
Blessed Tuesday! Share those gorgeous smiles today, please. It will lift everyone - even you! 😊✌☀🌻
phillip Rivers
All human beings are also dream beings. Dreaming ties all mankind together. -Jack Kerouac
Don't forget to share your favorites!
well im off to go outside alone for the millionth time hahaha i thought friends were supposed to involve you
k thanks
Everybody come out to Archer at 7 Support in the Mahogany Auditions...
Great meeting today with one of our speakers , so excited with the knowledge he will be sharing with us at the conference!
Hahahaha, chocolate judy? That's interesting..
does that mean that I can't be right all the time?
IMO... you will be the STEAL of the Draft
hipmunk.com, (started by Reddit cofounder) RT : What are the best flight search engines for last minute international travel?
Aww hunny lease dont tell me you need it! (;
Are we fixin to go back to the cars???
Guess what imma do? Hustle! Hustle! Hustle! HARD! Closed mouths don't get fed on this blvd!
There's always next week. Or the week after. Happy birthday to your dad!
I follow u on a probationary period in hopes u tweet bullets of knowledge and hilarity that blows my brains out
aight then let's tpain a gospel song lol
#first40songsonshuffle 22. mission district - so over you
New Nakate came in today. So many fun bright colors!! Check out the snap shots <3
My third and final panel at AFS. I so want to smoke.
This looks like a great opportunity.
We should be able to sleep in on these trips instead of getting up at 6AM
I'd like to see the sun rise but I am always in my office already.
Never had a sunburn on my legs before..... it hurts so bad! im also burned on my cheeks under my eyes and on my arms :/
Translation of what George Zimmerman's now-former attorneys are saying: Zimmerman has gone rogue.
#ILoveItWhenYou stay true to being a gentleman, even to another gentleman, like myself. #homo #lovesit ^_^
chase it with alcohol!!!
any good advice to share?
follow back.? <3
leading this session for Temple university over in Pennsylvania.
We agree.
“: flow in the new song is so unique! Great music bruh!” - advancing the genre .. Thank You!
OH MY GOSH....PRETTY LITTLE LIARS I AM SPEECHLESS!
Danica was so nice! Hotel bars are a great place to meet womem :)
the mau follow thing.
Are you serious? No one in Cali? I wish it was me-just keeping it 100%.
not all scholarly perspectives are detached (thankfully!)... e.g. ethnography
Thanks Coach, you know I gotta try to keep up with the little lady. It's good to be back! How's NYC treating you?
sorry, I am not privy to the docs or discussion, just got a sch e-mail with the decision
I make sure my reps are telling the truth by checking their voting records. Tells us you #votesmart for a chance to win a tee-shirt!
Facebook's Zuckerberg kicks off investor show in NY
The Hate Club currently has: Jacoby Jones, Billy Cundiff, and Steve Blake
Wish the girls were with me
have some pride for your home city, some people don't i guess .. .. .. but i do .. .. .. 504 till the day i die!!! Lol i sound ratchet
ur weekend in the weeds is almost over and we've got the perfect fix...#industrynight tonight from 8-10, 1/2 price bottles of wine. be there
thanks for the follow - what's your favorite movie quote?
Heading to the lake to maybe tan this belly a little :)
we better unless we lock someone else up
The 'Starbuckaroos' propose a bet. You lose, you lose the mustache. I lose, I grow one.
Cheyenne: What do you want to be when you grow up? Sage: Your husband.
Wtf Taylor made has rocket balls!
#MikeWallace RIP at 93 years old. Thanks for all those years of outstanding work.
“: It's my 19th birthday today. A RT or a reply from would be the best b-day present ;))” Happy Birthday!!!
So my sister bought me a balloon for my birthday and at school it flew away :(
email me at . I know a few. They work w kids but adults too I'm sure.
Name your favorite style of dance....Go!
And you also passed GO! #Collect$200 #BeautyContestNext?
Running on two coffees, two mountain dews, a few value bean burritos and adrenaline.
So far I'm loving #iTunes Match. Now I just need more #iOS devices to really take advantage of it. Maybe I should get an #iPad soon..
You are absolutely right. And i plan to. Stay tuned.
lol right? word
RT : #GPM communications team is interviewing scientists the 2011 PMM Science Team Meeting for an upcoming “Faces of GPM” campaign
#HappyMothersDay to all the moms and soon-to-be moms out there :)
was nice to meet you yesterday!
Let your smile change the world. Don't let the world change your smile.
It's soo funny how drunk ppl wanna grab ur junk when they have liquid courage... Man that's funny stuff...
August 2, 1979 - Yankee Captain, Thurman Munson, dies in a plane crash in Canton, Ohio. He was 32. The Yanks retired his number immediately.
Every Sat and Sun, $10 buckets of PBR tallboys !
Ahh, well at least we can hang out this summer then!
Don't forget, we leave for tour this Friday with THROUGH ARTERIES to hit up all the Texas hot spots. Don't forget to come see us in action!
RATE GAME! tweet me a number.
We made it through Irene! Time to show it!
I would and will wait for you...
I can't with
yo ~ hang this week? come meet the rest of the family. we will be in Hyde park
#randomsongs "Wobble wobble shake it shake it"! By the 504 boys
early leaving ass...missed the count down. Smh
you're being a great inspiration to me... thank you. Because of you I've written almost 5 songs...
Laying on my bed, watching H. R. Pufnstuf with :)
You can't help but begin to think that there may actually be a god.
Head's still killing me and I'm more tired after the nap. To be expected. Having trouble writing these lesson plans. Going to be a long week
“: Injury Update: The MRI on revealed a strained abdominal muscle. He is out indefinitely.” 😰
Last day for help kicking the habit - over 50% off a smoking cessation hypnosis session, only on www.crowdclick.com!
Wow...#FACT RT #Cancer's only get dressed because they have to.
Nice! They're definitely useful in those cases...we hope you're feeling better!
Congratulations! Have fun on your new journey!
Soundtrack from Dreamgirls playing while I design. Head bopping while I pull this look together!
yummylicious! fried spam for dinner!
At this point in the tour/drive/meltdown our conversations are little more than a series of disgusting pornographic non sequiturs.
Happytown was on ABC and got cancelled in 6 eps never airing the last 2 they had. HUGE internet campaign to save it but....
I miss our late night vent sessions....
mint juleps! And hats
I b on that! Lol
Jillian, did you ever get my second email? Were you able to figure out my HIMA membership status?
I've liked STP since around their second album. :) So that's about 1994. "Purple" was on heavy rotation during the summer.
Pretty Little Liars...so good cant even stand it!!!
Finishing touches are being added to my website. I can't wait to share it!
Don't wanna wait to be helped at the apple store? Cry. On my way back to work w a hopefully de-bugged computer.
What I love about graphic design is you can do so much with it be
Are you sure you aren't overlooking a type of quality?
RT We wrap up #Idol week on Tennessee Mornings with a performance in the studio from
thanks fellas!
thanks for the mention!
How do you make money online? You find out common problems and solve them. Juanita Waterman
What is the best Pandora Station ever, Alex
Whatever you've got going this weekend, pair it with a happy hour! www.gotime.com
is rocking it at Silk. That's how them Rockstar Boys do business!
you wanna fight? you're askin for it!!! ;)
So far I only have 2 ladies planning on going tomorrow. Lets please go to this show even for a little while.
...the crew sent a poem by Pablo Neruda to Brooke. Couse they know she loves it.They are now fighting against the elements
Did you look at dotProject?
I'm going to miss this show...
visiting or moving?
Like a tree.
Yep! So many great places to see before then!
But I have faith in her!
Does anybody have their Lit book for language arts with them right now ??? please ?
it misses you! come back! pleease!
it'd be amazing if you favorited this..
Sure :D, Follow back ?
My Vegas vacation needs to hurry up and get here before my tan wears off and I gain all my weight back.
I am pretty sure the morning sickness is gone! YAY
oh shit! Happy mothers day Chereereereeree
Game Recap
OH NO! RUN. RT : This man REEKS of bullshit & its making me want to puke.
im serious, do u not remember 2007
Never put off until tomorrow what you can avoid altogether.
Verlander charged with all four runs in #Tigers game. ALMOST the best two game start of season I've ever seen by Tigers starter BUT. . . .
what up
Professional communities publish fair use guidelines to help the courts know what's accepted in that community
Wondering if anyone would be interested in sponsoring $589 for a subscription for my company. I'd love you forever :)
Hate that my flight was right during a game 7
Yesterday I ran for the first time in a few months. Today I found those muscles that I lost.
RT if you're still awake!
Ad spotted on a billboard: "Don't you wish your boiler was hot like me?"
Dinner time is about to begun. Are you ready for the fun and great deal for everyone?
I'm sick to my stomach. 6 seconds. Carlson is soft. How the hell does that happen?
But Jehovah had no respect for Cain or his offering, which enraged Cain, hurting his pride.
Control your bitch. Her vagina is flopping everywhere.
You can now sign up for Lightning Talks in the Auditorium (1400).
its scary to think that nothing can kill that 0.01% germ
"INCONCEIVABLE." You keep using that word. I do not think it means what you think it means.
both of my brothers are on there way i haven't seen them since Valentines Day
this is useful! RT : make sure juices are more green/less fruit...good rule is 1 fruit (apple/pear/watermelon) per juice...
How are you Dear Man?
Sure - I plan on bringing back the card catalog. Hope you're ready for that!
Beamer, crib, and a fat wallet
Thank you! It was a joy to work on this audiobook.
We love hotels!
I know omg i typed "harry styles bi" into the search bar and everyones like ufcvguhjnvjjeksb please tell me what's happening
FML I'm on the train car w/ no AC, hell to the naw
Open Field could use more football this year.
This day needs to be over.
hehe! Fair enough. I do love math.
Occupy Wall Street is finally trending in NYC.
Game 7 baby!!!!! Exciting!!!! This is hockey!!!! Wow!
Contemplating my next move. You gotta go get it or get got!
lol I won't
Alice Veterinarian Launches New Animal Hospital Website - MarketWatch (press release)
Sometimes people surprise me. :)
thanks lady :)
happy humpity hump hump humpity hump hump day!
Was Good Bra
art invents reality...“: Had no idea Nat Geo built an UP house & got it to fly w/ balloons + passenger! t.co/ZBUeZItw”
BLACK. (With chocolate covered gummy bears.)
So excited to finally have a CakePop maker-not to go cakepop recipe crazy
My biggest dream? Be followed by Austin and meet him :). Oh, is your dream too? RT :)
I have so much to do today yet I'm finding no motivation to get out of my bed...
Today field-trip to Capitol Building.. To understand one country’s culture, you have to learn their history.
We are still looking for a Customer Service/Sales Manager for our Chili Ave. location.
Did anybody pick up the Notre Dame bag by the shotput ring? It has my phone, iPod and wallet in it and i need it ASAP!
how about cheating and buying tweets?
Saap was messing around with a ton of women. No one held a gun to his head.At least the 1 above his shoulders
awh my wittle baby ^.^ I called you earlier and you didn't answer I wanna see you tonight let's do something!
yeah. A nice mix of George Brett anger/Carl Everett crazy.
addict !!! Lest change that addiction with another one ;)
sometimes you just need to not work.
haha! Be afraid, be very afraid. :)
Bench and Wall Climbs not part of AMRAP
- got my drink watching the #hanson livestream now
Sorry, hon. We're trying to refinance which is less depressing but oh the home value is sad. ((hugs))
There has been a lot a questionable stuff written about EVs lately. Consider those sources, folks!
"Post news and tips for a variety." A variety of what?
Forgot my tinfoil hat today
I can't wait to see you and the rest of play tonight! :)
where is your new restaurant in San Diego going to be? Thanks.
i would run if the baby kitten came it would be like "GET IN MY BELLY!!!" lol
Great time moderating discussion on Tony Bennett for the Jazz Museum in Harlem last night. Bennett's a living icon of good taste.
Python threw an AssertionError exception, it says I'm not allowed more than 100 groups in a regular expression.
being that its the sox I always have the feeling. But I think we can pull this one off
IEPPal News - 4. The price of IEPPal RIGHT NOW is $97.50/year when you purchase a two year license.
nice! That's when you know it'll be great night
Wow kate upton, where have you been my whole life
My son needs a job. He has a baby! He's a cook & needs work in Fort Lauderdale area. Grandma going broke. HMU if u know of a job 4 him.
Amazing! #Dodgers down to their last out after giving up the lead in the 8th tie the game! Dee Gordon is clutch/Matt Kemp scores from 1st!
Is there an Instapaper for online videos?
Lots of hot girls in the building tonight!
Wishing u mattered to someone rather than no one, wishing u were more than just you
this game is lost. we look flat.
#MentionYourCrush not enough characters for them...lol
Let's be naughty and save Santa the trip. - Gary Allen
WAR FUCKING EAGLE!!!! Takeo Spikes is one scary ass motherfucker #the neck
oh. i haven't watched it yet. i pictured something cute and beautiful and thought you were being sardonic
Confucius Say...Man who go out with flat chested girl have right to feel low down.
She just scratches on the door, I get no sleep :( First she tries to kill me, then she gives me insomnia. Oy.
Why was today so stressful?
Sick in bed watchin movies.
no that would be fine, but why not start with 1?
Shoutout to for being so accommodating with my traffic accident situation. U guys made my week much easier!
omg pretty please follow me? :) <3
just saw a hipster wearing a ship captains hat and a childs power ranger sweatshirt
wine, spaghetti, and fresh chocolate chip cookies.
<--------LOVES A PRETTY GIRL IN SUM SEXY HEELS
Bless you Lol
I've been around way to long to believe prog. Lies.
looking good!
New Mexico's spring weather is here!
I've doing well having physical therapy every 3 weeks now how about u
If Ron #Artest hit me with the force of that elbow that he just hit #Harden with, I would be dead. #MettaWorldPeace doesn't like peace
Just kidding I haven't lost yet, it's the first day
Red didnt get ! Staying to black.
Knicks and Heat were big rivals in the 90's with players like Ewing, Starks, Alonzo Mourning, PJ Brown, Tim Hardaway and etc
Theres always somebody for you.
moral of this story: i'm not classy & also not good at being a starving writer. re-thinking law school every damn day.
Kiernan McMullan, Juneau, Fighting Aurora, Kyle Scidmore at the The Project Lodge TONIGHT! Tickets will be available at the door!
Just had a great meeting at e
I wanna see The Avengers again. :)
I'm sorry what did you say? I wasn't listening.
i would think that would be expensive...but it costs more because its technically fully managed.
Off I go, TO NARNIA.
LOL WHO ARE YOU?
challenged by institutional friction at #usnatarchives; old guard resists change; old methods die hard and so too their adherents
dear : i've been waiting patiently (21 years) for a new album. if you make one i promise not to d/l it from :) thanks.
media guru of #CIFF, is headed to Bhutan in May. (had to look up where it is, and how to spell)
The #TTOT hashtag is also usable during the week for your travel-related tweets/questions.
Agree! RT : It is also acceptable to refer to that area as "God's Country." Congrats.
I will for sure (: But first I need to meet him though!
Danny Green has 9 points in the third quarter, 11 for the game. The Spurs lead the Jazz 70-63 with 2:40 left in the quarter.
I hate the fact when us black people enter Store's the workers be like "YOU NEED HELP" .... I be like "DAMN I JUST GOT IN HERE"
Happy fathers day
Had an audition for #dunkindonuts yesterday I feel good about... grew up on the stuff and loved it!
If you tell the truth you don't have to remember anything. Mark Twain
I think his instructions are pretty clear. Send him everything he needs to learn Cairngorm...for free of course.
She's amazing!!!! When can we bring some young people with my foundation to hear you speak again?
You've got what it takes, but it will take everything you've got ;) x
you're welcome! <3 ahh I know I'm so excited!
quite the fog today! At least tomorrow will be 80 and raining....
And now Republican political ads drive me absolutely crazy in a way that Democratic ones don't. This is not rational. (2/2)
At Ikea taking a nap, pretending I live here. Wish these people would stop walking through my bedroom. Rude.
Been there give it an hour! ;>)
Yeah. thats good did you dry hump him?(;
Massive Congratulations Lovelies!!
Welcome to TwitterLand. Follow us. ;)
#aaasmtg Cornelia Dean says science journalists are not interested in reporting on grants, promotions and all but the top awards.
you're a fag and so is your man
So all of that excitement and we barely got an inch of snow, which is mostly melted. Go figure! Have a great weekend!
No way girl! my sister birthday was the 12th! ah & I might manage one of my main pools so you might not see me this summer:(
I feel for you bro...I can't believe you went from to Stephen A. and his large, idiotic ego...who'd you piss off?
need to work out how to retweet faster then two months later then original tweet
Heaviest "one inch" of snow I've shoveled in a while. :)
cause YOUR BITCH ASS AINT READY FOR IT! and because i didnt get no foams :(
LMAO....she will
Did red bull change something? I never feel the effects any more... And I don't even drink them that often!
If you are a photographer your job is to make people care about your obsessions
I hate it when ppl lie & you know they are not telling you the truth!!!!
they're the same shirt different print!!!
Family time>>>
enjoyed meeting you both! Thanks for the intro as always
Did you hear about next week!! Gourmet Food Trucks are finally coming to
MT : Listening to one of the great lecturers, Prof. Baughman talking about history of PR #madasawethen #UWRightNow <- love it!
LOL, im not sure.
Oh my you tweeted! Such a grown-up. Miss you Fina!
Oh ma god labor day weekend already?!
The good life, as I conceive it, is a happy life
Ah Monday. Way to remind me that I'm not qualified to be my own IT department. :(
Breakfast for dinner tonight! Select from a few of our day-time favorites.
Get some water! LOTS of it. :)
i'm so open when i'm drunk like it's insane
I will say this only because we're in the same situation. But good luck to your boys tonight.
wtf who said i was bulletproof, dont point that fucking gun at me
#operationfindnextgf She can't always think of herself
like it like that is my new favorite song!!! <3 i love you guys so much! Follow me please?! (:
I h8 my phone so much
Y did Romney say Obama was tryn to raise taxes on small bizness y didn't he just say Small Corporations=swaying the votes then no1 will vote
Nope. Old Fashioned.
#ICantDateSomeoneThat can't eat an entire pizza
Good job murray.(: lets see uk wrap this up and win.#BIGBLUENATION.!
Put a smile on ma'am.
News about Diablo I reminds me of the approximate 10 days I spent on the underground caverns of Diablo II collecting items.
wow here in Los Angeles, CA it's 10:45 am so it's tonite rite?
aren't they amazing?! They're hilarious! Haha'
Bad Teacher
For every single political issue in US, citizens are asked to donate money to fight the cause. Fed up with it. Totally fed up with it.
Awful. Terrible loss. What a waste. This team has a lot of holes...
Happy birthday!
oh my goodness! Arbogeddon?
It's so hot today .
-_.+!- G1 CERTIFIED WET TSHIRT CONTEST --- FRIDAY CLUB DRAMA --WANT TO GET IN FOR FREE?? TXT ME I WILL TELL YOU HOW---214 609 3316 --
I like the new Google. Although, I could do without the redundant links.
Good advice from QCityMetro's Burkins: Establish relationship with local paper. Don't just be a voice on the other end of the phone.
Ron Paul
i should rescind my tweet...let's just chalk that one up as user error :P
it's true, pretty soon no one will remember the days when you could sever an artery on a sharp metal chair arm
Facebook Friday and Billionaire's Weekend is coming >Steakhouses and car dealers take note.
I need an iPod.
yea lol that's what it means #GoSpursGo!!
Welcome to Twitter :) Check my following list for a bunch of agencies who are always posting events!
Licensing systems are not without costs themselves, and therefore inefficient
You're right about that! We're so fortunate to be able to work with you.
Just once, I would like to wake up, turn on the news, and hear... "Monday has been canceled, go back to sleep."
me too baby i love you so much mwah
HIGH FIVE! 🙏
4 LIS460ers: anyone else have trouble opening igoogle screencasts? Probably my computer, but just checking!
Is PP about a non-essential gov funded program that uses tax payer money = useless cut it
Get out do something.....
Haley:Dear College, cheese makes me gassy, see you in Sept. Cam:How'd she know I'm gay? Mitchell:Maybe b/c you ordered a drink a doodle do.
Predicting will have more followers than by the end of the night...
You reply so fast.. are you waiting for me? How sweet of you!
Don't fail, Vote pale
love you too...#UnleashTheFury :)
Via : Today (3/2) is Check Your Pet for Parasites Day, Employee Appreciation Day and Read Across America Day.
Be sure to come to the East Nashville Farmer's Market and see Chef Laura Wilson, winner of the Iron Fork competition, as she does a demo...
oh the poor lamb!!! How did she get the cut?
someone come feed me!!!!!!
that's great, doesn't everyone love me? Hahah love you too
Thanks for the inspiration
Im dosn off on da mid sentence outta our conversation
are you at the awards? I hope Lyndsey wins :-)!
Why am I still partying
saw your website- looks great!Was wondering if we could talk about our respective businesses and maybe setting up a linkback?
This brownie is so good.
Congrats! Good luck!
I'm sick of cold dinners...
I told her I thought I had already had it, and she told me I didnt. But she only had my records since like 2006. Dumb nurse lol
"How old was you in third grade""third grade age or 12 or 13" whole class was rolling.
1st time seeing him, Jason. But, he really gets it to #twist and #tilt. Impressive.
did not come across that way. I love being different but elegant at the same time
Not too happy with my Yahoo web hosting account. Anybody else use a hosting service with Wordpress? Thinking of going that direction.
Oh yeah! Got me excited now
(apropos of previous): 'cuz you don't have enough to do ;-)
“Peace comes from within. Do not seek it without.” – Buddha
That's what I thought. Chris and I were trolling target for you last night. EEK
My boyfriend fell asleep on me , like always ! -__-
Yep! Me and
Bella Swan ’s Carolina Herrera Wedding Dress To Be Reproduced Kate Middleton's Wedding may have been the most anticipated day of the ye
2012 NBA Playoffs ... Taking the Spurs over the Heat to win it all.
"I am at two with Nature."
You know you went to bed too late and got up too early when you can still see your last tweet without too much scrolling.
New clinic space ready for the move in this weekend. Grab your packing boxes Shriners Hospital is on the move!
i miss you love
If you are in Bton and can't see the CoH subtitles b/c of the snow warnings, come see Strange Things at the the Buskirk-Chumley Jan.23! :)
I love that quote!!!
Having a grandparent with early onset, I could not agree more!
Happy B-Day hope ur hvng an awesome day
Grrrr, I hate this geology lab! Its soo boring !
RT this if you are sick like me
Captain Obvious
Music,money, weed
So my dads comes home with a new and my mom didnt even know... Lolol
Here comes the rain again. Falling on my head like a memory. Falling on my head like a new emotion.
I'm thinking the best way to end this awful week and weekend is an impromptu trip to NYC to see Shelby Lynne.
I'm so excited and so thankful to have my photography featured in ZINK magazine later this month!!! So happy!!
So how are you liking being a Hannah in this cultural moment, and am I the 100th person to bring it up?
Happy Birthday !
You're next on the Boston parade list now
yeah the faded orange/pink monstrosity had to go.
If it was easy, everyone would do it.
productive! I could have used an extra hour of sleep, but I guess that's why they make coffee :)
Are you going tomorrow with your family?
How's training for the NBA Draft going?
Y didn't UNSC take up the issue of Bahrain in a similar fashion ? Would love your insight.
I know it's weird but occasionally I DON'T want to hear mariachi music ALL day!
Yay! I'm down to read it if you want more eyes on it.
yes! Even 2 little tables! Heck, I'll just bring a picnic blanket for that patch of grass next door!
YES! Sadly, flight is delayed. But it gives me more time to put the finishing touches on this journal article :-)
Make your own history.
I never eat at Arby's but their orange cream shake is gonna be a summer addiction
See you all a little after 4PM on Friday then :) It's my day off, perfect for a Happy Hour!
just a tad bit lol
yes it goes to the Jordan mills foundation which then goes directly into my bank account
lmaooooooo so who is JUAN?
well done empress
You can grow but remember, empires always fall.
thanks 4 the article. Football is dangerous in nature, only so much you can do. Hope vets get care.
thank you for your support. Get the word out there for us. Enjoy your weekend.
Thx on the offer -- but volunteer registration filled up in a week. We do have plenty of cider for you though!
Oh how I love coming back to Milwaukee from a track meet during rush hour...not. #thankgodigotarootbeerfloat!
Craving constant tropical weather. The good kind, not the devistating storms.
Happy birthday !!
haha like none since the first season or since the beginning of season 3
oh okay cool(: & he just did it... wow! I think it costs to Skype with him now, idek how your supposed to do it? ._.
Got pretty good footage of Kirsten Dunst and Garrett Hedlund leaving
At Evanston Ethnic Arts Festival. Great food and music... And I got some great fair-trade batik clothing!
Watching Border Wars on TV. They use a Flir camera from a plane at night to find fugitives. Now why can't they use this to find a Bigfoot?
Automobile extended warranties are not worth the added cost. Profit margins for these are as high as 75%.
Thx! RT : At , strongly recommends to journalists & news orgs.
u know u wanna play wit me dats yo problem #twitter after dark
- turned out it was an out of date version of chrome that was freaking out. upgraded and it worked fine. thanks!
dude thats so awkward. :P
you're absolutely right. BUT we only get our t-shirts from our wholesale parent company and they don't have the license for it.
we are in search for a GAS weed wacker...anyone?
RT : What tricks do yall use to attribute actions back to specific media channels or tactics?
#thatawkwardmoment when announces hes still single.....but youre clearly dating him....
Beautiful morning! Ready for a crazy busy day ☺
Crap! Sneezing while my mouth is full of food.
i'm good. How are you?
Good news at doctor today! No surgeries to be had! Fibroid exploded and now in the clear. Woot woot!
I knew about Karmin before she even went on SNL.... Am I a hipster yet?
Just when I'm completely depressed by bigotry in the news, comes on my feed to wish me a Happy Grilled Cheese Day. Ah, love.
heyy(; how are you?
Healthy breakfast! Love it :) Did you get the BOGO 6" deal?
hopefully we will get to see that.
I should be writing this since I'm both degree-ed in Eng & I'm hilarious. Whose a girl gotta tweet around here?!
all in all not bad. Definitely need practice with them. Chunked too many which is all in my head/swing. Solid irons though.
I always brown and drain.
Doing that now with indexing course. Going online so starting from scratch. Considering re-engineering org similarly. FUN!!
this house has 4 kitchen. FOUR! its huuuugeee
Soo happy today's friday yayy(:
if you get the hamster ball you won't have any friends.
Feels Like Summer <3
I love that movie!
It's probably a bad idea to base an entire semester's class around alpha software, right?
I have the worst diahrea. Like im afraid to sleep lmao, goodnightt
congrats lil brother! If you need help with publicity-hit me up ! Luv ya!
NO. Him and Caitlin were better :)
Brushing your teeth six times before you go to the dentist so they think you have really good teeth :D
great lineup
Health Tips: Lower your anti-nutrition intake by flossing, it could add five years to you expected life span.
Hanging out in Pueblo today... It's always nice to come home... It's even better when its not 5000 degrees.
Picking up Owen now, he's been at the vet all morning getting neutered..
yes she does.
Thanks for sharing. :)
Pooch Hall! Nice.
You don't do nothing like that
Diabetes experts from EVMS and beyond are leading Turning the Tide on Diabetes conference in Va Beach this weekend.
“If you want to go somewhere, it is best to find someone who has already been there.” -Robert Kiyosaki
...and some gum. I got gum too.
Embarrassing confession time: I have a giant bruise on my ass cheek.
Out gettin lunch#chinese food
We still have a few spots open for this summer's SAT Bootcamp! Program starts on July 6! Visit www.columbiaprep.com for more details :)
well seriously I think it's incredible. Congratulations to you and you wonderful wife.
Love it!
The Lakers trying to do something, I see.
Another awesome episode of #TheGoodWife It's the best show on TV
lol. Bout to hop on this plane and be in the town !!!!
I bet it would too!
Being held hostage at Swope Auto. Why does it take all day to buy a used car?
I guess I did grow up and moved on if I just shrug off when I see #OOMF talking to other girls sexually lmao I din gives no fucks
RT : RT : Last few days to catch some fantastic films Fest - Learn more about the event:...
Oh wow! a sequel to Husbands? He was gone too soon! Love Opening Night, Woman - the Gena focused films.
now CRC rogue idiot quacks have thier cockroaches in service..harassing Belinda Jackson..PCC/Cascade
We love boobies
We know damn well if the Social Security fund was near bankruptcy, the robber barons wouldn't want access. That fund is worth trillions.
I've been searching for everyday Syrah. Just ordered a six pack. Hoping it's a 10 for me!
- Thanks for adding us to your list - /attorneys-lawyers. Have a fun-filled Memorial Day
but friday i am going in to track an tune with P. Colley. maybe version 347 of this one song. sheesh.
kidding im hyper af im never sleeping tonight
Oh yeah...hockey player...I knew that! (Not.)
"To you, [God], they cried and were rescued; in you they trusted and were not put to shame. - Psalm 22:5" GBY Go Broncos..!!!
yes you are(;
SAMOSA SNACK TIME > potato chip snack time!!!
Number one use of my phone: playing Temple Run on the can....
If a girl tells you to listen to a song pay attention to the lyrics
just got a gift. Ask her what it is.
trying to get them to understand is gonna be a bitch.
omg what if you were the one giving it that would be even better haha
Must have been inspiring for them to see former Badger 's locker. Looks like you just missed him.
Pacers win?! Weird.
oh jeez I thought so! Happy birthday girl
There's a door in the corner at the other end of the room from Ian, just past my room. Thru there & straight ahead are Phil's birds
For all the Bulls fans freaking out, please check what the Bucks are doing to the Heat. This is not going to be an easy season for anyone.
I'm such a mean girlfriend 😭😂😂
Up early for what's bound to be an exciting day at the with our clients! Pics to follow on Monday!
I feel grounded.
Lets get this main event started!
thanks. :) think you can get some other lawlorffs to send some?
Um oka Night i guess ...
Can't wait to get our new tees! Check out their clothing line!
I LOVE YOU TO
you look more like and old courier.
Its crunch time for this chick, save all that extra shit mama ; )
had Berela's this morn.Huevos!The other morn Golden Pride.M breakfast!
I'm signed up for beta access and now I'm more intrigued.
Jen thinks I should be an asshole to boys and keep them waiting for more. Says it could be fun. What do you all think?
My "little" brother is coming home tomorrow from 3rd overseas deployment! Army reservist. This time was 9 months. Can't wait!
Today is National Blame Somebody Else Day, go ahead and point those fingers.....let's see who and what you blame someone else for. :)
You tried your best and you failed miserably. The lesson is 'never try'. ~ Homer Simpson
Boom! Eureka moment!
Ah know, g! But I gots tuh have mah buffalo chicken!
you know I do sleep well with others?(;
that would be awesome!! Are you available sometime early next week?
Working on lots of web projects! Some to be launched very soon! :)
Saw a chick nabbed for stealing at mall. My kid says 'I'm good at being sneaky' w/o thinking I turned and said 'I will F you up'.
When people run around and around in circles we say they are crazy. When planets do it we say they are orbiting.
#10FactsAboutMe 5. I've never dated or kissed a boy 6. Austin, Zach, Rob, Alex,&Mama Mahone follow me 7. I have heart problems :/ [c]
But he's good lol
#NowPlaying The Question Is by The Winans
Great point. However, dinosaurs had brains while the lowly roach did not! One successfully adapted; the other not!
Freeway - "Free"
re: CR#2, cont. "… if you can find it — it’s a chinato, a quinine-bearing, fortified aperitif wine"
Tax returns don't mean a thing, it's not important,it's personal. Question why's Romney not released his.? $57,000 a day w/o explanation ?
yes i know(:
Getting my new MacBook today!!! Then it's class all day today... Yes, I have a class on a Saturday.
Okay, so is it the same login information as last time? Can't wait to converse with you all...
Why must centipedes have soo many legs? :-X
What? I didn't say they were bad or doing anything wrong. They're letting WBA have the ball and countering and it's odd.
:) Tomorrow will be the official release. Stay tuned!
my nyc taxi driver was puerto rican. ain't seen too many of those around. playing some good salsa.
Just had 1st InCopy use, on a bulletin. Went great, saved me about 4 rounds of tiny corrections--still did alignment fixes, tho.
Thanks for following!
Hi <3 This page is dieing down , but its not dead. <3 SO please spread the word about this page. <3 ... -McKenzie <3 A.K.A Louis <3<3<3
the ONLY ceiling art at Fudpuckers :)
Are you still in Austin? Dinner plans?
And I know that they will never understand cause I'm just a kid, but they tell me I'm the man
BROCK!!! It's a tie game in the third period ... Gonna need this warning off the screen.
Mass murder: at one place by one person and more than four people are killed.
naturally i think it's completely possible. there are a lot of OTC supplements that could do it. But I don't know all sources.
don't say that :/ your right by me in my book..
When writing essays I still print them out and edit by hand. Am I dating myself already?
wtf i was gonna bust out step by step lol
it's all automated for the emails, tweets and text msgs, gets truncated for texts too
I am not talking about the UI, I am talking from a developer's standpoint. Naming something event33 is not good design.
Thank you for dining with us. What did you order?
Did we play u guys this yr, I forget? “: can unfollow me ASAP. I'm a Louisville fan, fuck them weak ass t-shirts 2.
Apparently hipsters love hockey. I wonder why.
WFB tonight! Won't be in costume... maybe tomorrow? Come and visit!
Follow me :)
we had freezin cold, snow, rain/mud ha, looking forward to a summer shoot
that ditto machine art concept is really cool. thanks for sharing.
God please forgive them, for they don't know better.
who's all down for a road trip?!
love all of you!! we're gonna kick ass tomorrow:)
Well we aren't starting
Simple changes in wall design can save kid's in school during earthquakes- Revkin's mission is to get the info shared
I'll take it! Way to battle back!! We are still alive! Let's bring it back to Orlando!!
Knowing where you stand is the best piece if information ever.....
Just loaded some new questions into #SportingExplore live play. Lock in your answers!
Actually not sure if slideshare Tour is 508-compliant, but I'm not too familiar with adaptive tech. ?
#iLoveMyMomBecause no matter what I know she'll always be there for me
This is the year of Enterprise and productivity apps! Says 's Tim Chang.
RT COMMITMENT is behind every great accomplishment. Without it u have no chance to overcome "hard" or overcome "impossible".
oh what are you reading?
Getting ready for a YallFest panel presentation this morning with Ellen Hopkins, Melissa De La Cruz and my dear friend Marjory Wentworth.
A 5th grader speaks to save FLES: "I feel learning a new language has opened up a new world for me...why limit a great program?"
Im not lucky Im blessed :-)
Yes. Presenting tomorrow at Speed Innovating, and had 21st Century Skills Task Force meeting today. Say hi if you see me!
I am interested in the Brewers.
promotions via
Snatch piece
our biggest competition is ignorance, indifference, and indecision.
Last time I saw one of these, the system was highly unstable. Not sure if due to OS having extremely limited hardware support?
So are you getting the shoes?
in a blowout!
Thanks for the FF mention!
Totally cried when 9 turned into 10 though.
it IS lovely in Seattle today/this week! AND, my Mom arrives for a week-long visit today! YAY!!
I am a loud bitch. Like, really, I need to shut the fuck up. I'm annoying myself.
You need to warn people before you put up a picture like that. The guy in red has the deepest V neck I've ever seen.
Watching Lena Dunham's Tiny Furniture. She's instantly my hero after reading about her on NPR's Fresh Air.
pocket pussy
Angels are sensitive to your thoughts and needs. Ask for help with positive intentions, they are here for you.
thanks for the add sweetie
I think I'm just still 'well-fat'!
Color outside dem lines
I like talking about concerts like I actually know the people. Hey Brad, so excited for your concert. I love you.
Of course you have! It is only 4 months away! Now for a theme...thinking...
its gonna rain
Best of luck ! Go win one for us!
your welcome 😜
I don't I will ever sink that far. My binges are usually granola, smoothies, or broccoli.
thank you for the RT Barbra, hope you enjoyed the Elvis pics as much as I did.
“Life is not measured by the number of breaths we take, but by the moments that take our breath away”
#2wordsasianpeoplefear Short Penis!
should go to Myrtle Beach, South Carolina
when madison tweets with a '<3'. I fangirl too much.
I'm ready for summer
Today is my #someday will follow me? #neversaynever right? 21
today told us that the new flagship will not be coming to the US. and today chris is a very sad person.
Yikes, market looks terrible today!
You guys.
Liking someone who likes me back
☼ Try not to have a good time...this is supposed to be educational. Charles M. Schulz
My phone just decided to visit Bing by itself. It's not even an internet phone. Clearly the singularity has arrived, and it's stupid.
Been focused all week. Time to visualize. 36 hours until game time.
YOUR COMING TO PHOENIX?!?!?!?! I LIVE IN PHOENIX!
Moombahton Massive was insane last night! I would have tweeted then but I gets no service in uhall. The whole crew killed it!
: As more involved in drug discovery, had to engage w/ FDA. Same goals: safety and efficacy webinar
why thank you :D touch me all the time thats probably why.
Allen: Sunset review said TDCJ does not track outcomes for re-entry programs, despite $80 million spent.
wuts GreenHitz? do you mean to follow hot new artists?
Jesus has paid the price. Yes, even for THAT too. Take Him at His word! Continue to confess The Word regardless of what it looks like.
that's very pinteresting.
I want JOSE HER-Nadez
#newbeatport should send me an invite for their beta release 'cuz I'm a web designer and DUbStep lover.
Happy Cinco de Mayo everyone!!
As a business owner your goal is to replace yourself with systems. It's the only way to build an excellent company.
7 Things You’ve Got to Know About the 2011 World Series
if it makes you feel any better, I hate everyone too
Congratulations to Jennifer and Justin!
All I want for my birthday is a date with !
You had me at "Bud Light cans."
How is life treating ya friend? Praying for ya success!
I joke with my wife that this is "Ike & Tina!!! But it is so Tina with a little Ike!!
You should steal parts of other shows.Dance in the audience randomly.A wig a week.Paternity tests on the co-hosts.Free uggs...
Getting Slapped.
Live music at Varsity Bar! The Union League Sessions, Stew Nelson, and Tessy Lou & the Shotgun Stars! No no cover, drink specials!
OPD deployed in various sectors around downtown looking for cat &mouse vandals, arson
have to be up in 4 hours, dance competition tomorrow :)
no one has picked it up. I'd be pissed if it was my bag.
works for me! Haha
I'm Antonio, Reference Librarian at a medical library in NYC.
Cold run today. Wore everything I packed except for a plastic bag. After a mile realized I should have worn the bag too.
yeah im gonna delete the tweet with my number # cuz maybe someone is gonna text me lol
Who do I need to commission to get an arsenal of Nerf guns???
I'll need to check them out!
Nope chillin in tonight I have work in the morning haha so I will save the partying till tomorrow haha.
"Through all the hard times in my life those nights kept me alive."
i'm not bored, i'm just not having fun. -__-
MAKE IT HAPPEN. Period. :)
:) RT : #ThingsIwantTheMost to return to the ring and kill all those fucking zombies out there
damn you got down during your performance <3 loved the outfit too.
Lol tebow and Ryan together. Talk about an oxymoron.
The first "BS fauxtrages"? Where have you been the last few months.
Meh. Close enough. Just make sure you leave some extra blankets out for them.
Happy Hunger Games and may the odds be in favor :-)
Who is your favorite musician to listen to in the winter?
Hey if your going to the French Market on Bittersweet/Irving Park - Dave will be there with our wonderful coffee.It's a beautiful day-enjoy!
Thanks! If you've got lots of friends in poker, we're looking for affiliate reps all over the US. LMK if you're interested.
Is Jenga one of the Hunger Games?
I am not playing with this #daydreamsandnightmares album. Ask. what he heard today.. I swear this shit is gonna be nice! As you were
Shout out to the newest tweeps to follow us and join the FreeHand Corps: , & !
Tell me more about the link promo - def possible. It does mean I'm going to have to change a lot of profiles & email signatures!
It's almost Game of Thrones time on HBO!!
My Little Porny!!!
A person can't really truly fail unless they give up
Glad we went. Its awesome that you & are fun AND professional; those are 2 qualities rarely paired in folks so young
and to you too, sweetheart. Thinking of you this weekend. Holding the space for you...:-)
Thanks for the Follow
Need Guys, one in dog costume, one to be his friend, average looking, to do events on May 28th in NY, DET, ATL and MPLS.
Where is the pressure on these QBs? Driving me nuts.
Right, let's bulldoze Downer Woods for football and basketball arenas they don't need.
I won't be happy until all the memories are erased from my mind.
i was thinking red if it is a color... gold with the white lines might be a little much. honestly don't believe the color part
I'm assuming is supposed to be funny.
Browns needed a qb, rb, rt & wr. They got all four in the 1st four rounds.
this is why I sell you out.
Thank U all very much for the follow! :-)
how date u not save me a piece lol
Xoxo ;) RT : that is a good solution but you should check out what my friends over at are doing
Watching #Cheaters is this how guys fist fite now? Ha! Fiting is never the answer, I knw this frm experience! Fuck 'em, they ain't worth it!
LaHair, my guy!
Well off to the gym. Got to get back at it. Just got a call from ready2model going to be a ring girl in SF on Friday!
No question Scott should be #ACC player of the year, but he won't win it. Carolina bias will prevent it.
Just signed on to twitter!
i think...that i maybe..just maybe..might be in love with my best friend's crush of almost two years. -.-
so many people love me somebody got to hate me
"30 ROCK, COMMUNITY, And PARKS & RECREATION will all be given shortened "send-off" seasons then terminated." --- WHAT?!??!? NO
Everything I Do I Do For You Girl
What does it take to succeed as an #entarch? Strategic relevance and creative brilliance!
You asked me about Damon? What else did you ask?
I sit back think sometimes "wth is your plan in life" ..please dont be that person I'm thinkin about!
My wife's upset,she's pregnant & got a pimple.It looks like a cutepretty freckle.I've had huge fetus sized zits all my life,& still get them
Worked out just like we planned it. Thanks
#Lin Ninja Spin in the lane!!!
Im Hopping he Kicks Some Because on my Neighborhood I go like 5 Broncos Fan! and Im the only Patriots...
Yeah, that's dumb. What's the matter with people?
Paul Pierce is the #TRUTH series all tied-up & home court is stolen baby!!! Time to take that momentum back to #BOSTON #CELTICS ALL DAY!!!!
Pretty sure I'm sitting near Stan Lee at LAX. If not him, it's that guy who does all the cameos in Marvel films. ;-)
i so get it. abbey and i were wandering aimlessly down the halls of flywheel-since you were away this week
Chicago has gone from snow to 60+ back down to 40 and is headed for snow -- all in a week.
#foodie Sushi at the Hibachi Grill in WSP was very tasty. I've discovered to my surprise, late in life, I like sushi muchly
Are You Gunna Miss Sarah When You Gunna Be Home Schooled Next Year?
Brand New r00lz
i want long hair i use to have my hair up to my hips know its up to my shoulder oh alittle bit lower
Calm your balls bitch -__-
Life in prison plus 25 years for Cyril Williams for murdering trooper Wesley Brown at Applebees in 2010
Adam Sandler has a new movie, does anybody care ? He's gone from the best to the worst.
#incaseyoudidntknow I'm a nerd
Holidays are for the weak of heart.
Don't act like you didn't know that was coming. He puts you on the border and decides whether he likes you or not
heyy i have a question!
beautiful buddy, show it off.
#ItsCrazyHow we both meet :-)
Thank you so much love!
Everyone needs someone on the squad willing to pull their coat and #chincheck them #thankful i have a WONDERFUL village & we laugh later :-)
Hmm.. Trying to find a recipe for those simple, refreshing apparizer bites. Low-cal style. Which one of you has amazing low cal recipes?
. I didn't think I could get more jealous of all the ppl at #sxsw, but you just did it. Love the Spazmatics!
Good luck!
Thanks for the follow!
RT : is the greatest thing to happen to me today. Can't WAIT to learn a new language this summer!
Kids of my time have mastered peeing and texting
I dont need anymore empty promises and lies.... I get enough of that from our government.
really? Mines just started lucky me c; haha Really? Are you in school or something? Thats great (:
o ok
It is snowing at Penn State & its 40 here...and you wonder why im going south
Anyone remember Chief Wahoo McDaniel? What a racist character that was...
Every success is built on the ability to do better than good enough.
SONIC DRIVE-IN TUESDAY SPECIAL (3/20 only) BOGO SHAKES ALL DAY (OPEN TO CLOSE). Plz mention txt when ordering. Have a SuperSONIC Day!
Why does this always happen to me though.. o.0 Lmaoooo!
always wanted to do that route - hope you're getting some good vid over there too
DUH I ALREADY KNOW! ! LOL
thanks to for letting me jump on with him...always fun....and he laughs at my awful jokes.
I really like Koivu also (1/2 Finnish for me), but I'm also a realist that this team just lacks 1-2 players to make playoff
I wish I had enough money to work with I would spend my last penny just do a song with him
Hi there im a true Cena Girl Fan i believe in him entirely and im always having his back when i catch people hatin on him
That's right, BMOFAB today!
omigosh, I do that all the time...
You think you can maybe follow me...?(: Or tweet me? Or anything<3
my birthday is on july4.ik its in2months.can u wish me a HbD?tat day?
just returned from the 24-hour apple store. lots of folks even well past midnight.
#livegive same here and that sounds good period!!! man im hungry!!!!!):
Hey Boston
Stressed is desserts spelled backwards.
This puck is going way to fast for my eyes. I'm not use to this.
yes I've missed my amykins very much! :p
Grand Lodge has the Children's Cottage available on 7.21.12 for your next event - connect with a Coordinator at 503.992.9530 today!
do it!
The Center has a dome ceiling above a beautiful reception area, the perfect spot for a cocktail hour to kick off your event!
Thanks for the feedback on my scene. Sorry it was so late when I finally figured out how to send it :)
I don't back up. But I might be open to duets.
Quaker Instant Oatmeal Stout
Giving someone else #equalrights does not infringe or take away your rights. It just makes it illegal to enforce your prejudice and hate.
Law without justice is a wound without a cure-William Scott Downey
Thanks again. SO kind of you.
If I am not ripped by the third month. I am beating up every trainer.
Holy crap!! I'm so glad I'm not the only one in DC that's been on two first dates with the same person, ha!
May the force be w you May Day Occupy protestors!
thinking about the possibility of making a REAL DEAL non-profit at some point. would we have to change the name to get grants!?
ugh MT : Ellen's at it again today. FB photo victims (mostly female) humiliated; audience hoots, cheers, laughs
Select an anchor song that bring all that great emotion flooding back into your day. What a way to wake up!
you have rock canyon-fort collins?
Wake up & realize. Yesterday was a good day, tomorrow will be a greater day; meaning today is bomb day
Read the latest blog post from BEA's Librarian Blogger Miss Julie: Author Visits to Libraries.
check out who made the front of today's press telegram! well, our homemade floating banner did! thx lowes, home depot & some old water skis
A quick tip: answer as quick as you can with a date range. Promise to refine the date range later. It's enough 90% of the time.
Really enjoying the MnPALS user group meeting today. Excellent feed back. My mind is brimming with new concepts to take home!
Did you know we offer Deep Heat Therapy Relief? It’s just one of the Choices you can add to your weekly massage therapy session.
You always get this awful feeling in your stomach when you know you and a close friend are drifting from one another.
Tampa bound Feb 21st...
Re: the phrase "the cat's out of the bag"-who put a cat in a bag & thought "ha! this will be my big secret!"?
Afraid I'd behave like a freaked out chihuahua if I drank that!
KUS MY MAMA WAS TAKIN ME OUT TO EAT AGAIN TONITE BUT IMA SEE WATT I CAN DO WIT HYMNEXT WEEKEND KUS YOU SEINORS LEAVE NEXT
A fly does not mind dying in coconut cream. – Swahili Proverb
NCAA East Regional tournament at TD! Stop by for a pre/postgame meal and drink!
happy mothers day Mama, it applies to u because u r like a mother to so many of your Kids ! And to our kids 1day xoxo
i gotta study that !
If you think the United States has stood still, who built the largest shopping center in the world?
awe. that was so sweet! i love you austin! please follow me!
Watching Scare Tactics waiting on 12 little girls to fall asleep.
Yeah, that's right, c'mon throat, swell and hurt some more! You too headache, keep shaking my brain. Thanks , your the best!
thank you girl! And I will :) Hope I see you tonight!
Dear Twitter, Area 31 is where to be tonight :)
Seeking K attys with ANDA experience for a project. Please message me for details.
I'm going to the game on Wednesday and I wanted to ask you , when you yell " let's go clippers lets go" would you like if ..
time. lol, i've had this for a year or so.
What is with these bad calls against the #knicks gimme a break!!!
Down to the single digits! 9 days!
.: No idea who's viewing/sending what. E.g. alarm clock app that sends out your location and phone ID every time it rings.
yeah that would be smarter
Thinking for the future
Thanks for Retweet!
Loved that quote!
Come and join Dennis or Michelle at the bar for a refreshing Mango Martini!
just watched too. Feel the same way! Brutal
National #zoo in #Washingtondc w ! Rraaaarrrrrr. Show me some grizzly bears.
"[Haunted House] This is the sound of cosmic sludge, dark and eerie with a host of spirits set free." -Bruce Lee Gallanter, Downtown...
I'm amazed! This guy at the gym discovered a way to build muscle. Apparently all you has to do is grunt & holler like an asshole for 2 hrs
that is so sweet! Happy birthday to your whole family!!
Wayne Shorter.
- Trigger hands down. TL Drum Rehab is cool sometimes, and do is Massey DTM I you want MIDI.
hello some bodyhere !
We're opening up for new found glory on 9/11!!!! This show is already sold out!!!
fun times today chatting with about Haverford, curating, and how 60 word labels make 350 word sidebars seem long.
Only us bro. Hating on the skanky sister missionaries of new jersey. ugh
YO CHRIS BROWN DO YOU KNOW HOW HOT THE FLAME OF A BLOW TORCH IS ? WELL JUST ASK UR CD'S SNAPP CRACKLE MELT DOWN ...
What about restoring America's defenses against poverty, inequality, discrimination, jobs moving overseas, etc.?
I can't wait for Thursday! I know it's going to be a blast!
hey tweeters spring break !!!!!!!!
IHOP with Mom before work. Having a wonderful morning! ALL SMILES :D
Or for dinner/starters: SCALLOP CEVICHE, crisp bacon, orange segments, shaved fried sweet potatoes
I can get you on the list. I have juice.
Paper Passion - new fragrance that smells like old books for those who want "retro literacy" with their high-tech.
If it's a grower, isn't it automatically a shower?
i am dying over that "colon" one...
Making dinner for my valentine. Hopefully he's still talking to me after he eats it.
I don't wanna leeeeaaaave!!!!
What's the biggest relationship deal breaker?
Thank you! I appreciate the love and support!!
I think your seagulls have been conspiring with my 7am crows!
I'm really not getting all the accolades for his performance but I guess he set the bar pretty low.
"Learn how to be happy with what you have while you pursue all that you want."
to do what? Let me guess
o scary! But still kinda beautiful!
High stepping , trying to avoid the bullshit%&$#@
Looking for extras for a TV spot shooting in Madison, WI on Tuesday, April 10th from noon until 6pm. Get back to me if you're interested.
I hate when people like fuck him fuck that but yet you bring him into the conversation all the time! :O
No violence allowed! :D
calls come in, I don't pick up in time, so I call back. They dnt answer.. Hands the air
#Mydreamfor2012 to stay with my boyfriend <3
hope you feel better !
RT RT : Keep the #DC Food Trucks alive! Pls go to www.yesontitle24.com help them out!
sure does. see you her I hope.
Exhaustion is setting in after a morning of advocating for #intled but #nafsaAD was an amazing experience (again!). Thanks
15 minutes of class left and I'm done reading the assigned chapters. WHAT SHOULD I DO.
what are you up tonight hood?
In the car on mi way to jersey
hey! You need to tweet more
Yo DJ dudes: Short e-mail blasts are your friends. Nobody wants an Old Testament length diatribe on how rad your party is or 312,442 images.
Watching You Got Served:Beat The World
Indiana btr get it 2gthr. If they blow another lead I'm gonna be PISSED
Sleep finally....
hahaha. Did you see Missing Link's new site? Do you have any press photos so we can put you on the featured clients page?
Can Ed Sheeran and A Fine Frenzy PLEASE collab, or... The world would implode from the amazingness that they would create together.
Anyone wanna hang out for a lil bit? Text me 5039609407
Blowing trying to watch the new American Pie movie but its way too much shit on my mind
It's a beautiful day OUTSIDE!!!
Josh Groban's doing a live webcast @ 7:30 tonight on www.joshgroban.com. Fan club members tune in @ 7 for an exclusive 1/2 hour on your own!
Banning books? Not on our watch! Tell Sup. Pedicone + board to reverse #ethnicstudies ban in
YES come to New Orleans and watch it with us!
"so who's gonna watch you die?"
Well it's over .... wins at Atlanta on a Tuesday afternoon ... YES, he beat #JimmieJohnson ....
Ughh he boring AF ! I need some new texting buddies ASAP !!! :-/
Thanks. I think i started early, i already gained 2 lbs. I have to slow down a little bit. ;)
Is he capable of love?
he said he want to do a track with me so i was like hell yea so im puttin money together for that but i feel im on my way
Put up a heck of a fight just couldn't finish it out. Really gonna miss Robbie but he played his heart out
You have been hacked. Your account is sending out phishing direct messages.
Those who live for love live well A. Weigh
working on it! Are you still failing to overcome every obstacle you've ever faced? I miss you!
where are you? It's FIRE tonight!
I like Miguel Angel Jiminez, but Im gonna lose my mind if he gets to -6.
so many blogs to catch up on! overwhelmed!.
My "Summer State of Mind" video premiere and performances by me and others at the Hard Rock tomorrow for 'Kickin It'. You going to be there?
Nice! Will be there in mid-May for grandson's first birthday and to see him and his parents off to Japan for 3 years.
Im going to go ahead and go to sleep doh smh
different one now haha.
Heading to seattle
To those staying in Madison for the summer, REGISTER TO VOTE for the June 5th election! To those of you who aren't, VOTE ABSENTEE!
I shall get a pick me upper tomorrow. Hopefully!!!
Hope you all had a nice weekend.
Go donate some money, go follow them, go like their Facebook page and listen to their mother fucking music!
I wonder what alexis fed him..
#SEM10 Shona dance workshop last night at welcome reception. Super fun. Although I came close to accidentally slapping a bunch of ladies.
Did Darling Niki and Westley hook up last night? They had a date. She got home.. late.. ?? I hope they dish the dirt on our blog soon!
Oh Hahaha I hope your ok! (:
Yo chick she so thirsty
One of the best days of the year :)
best band ever!
That's awesome! They didn't invite you down?
Just layed down to cashin out. Its dead well be having a funeral service tomorrow on youtube after the engineer gets done mixing!!
Kitchen Tip: store your citrus in a basket on the kitchen counter; room temperature citrus relinquishes more juice than cold citrus.
Gn tweet hearts. tomorrow will be better than today
Thing is, *I* wanted to be the asshole who parks in the family parking space, and she beat me to it!
T Rich baby!!!
Our competitor has free shipping on orders of $75 or more. That's almost as good as our deal: Free Shipping on $0 or more.
#dinosaurs “: '01 Red Sox have to be in consideration for the Carl Everett factor alone”
If I gotta act like a bitch , towards some then oh well ...
LT SHE IN MY TOP 3
Me too! “: This Boilermaker wishes IU good luck tonight.”
two exciting things left for summer... Jersey shore and... BAND CAMP. lol
was up was up
if I had yo love mic-o just came on on the iTunes and it's bangin
get a ya boy I got some fire fa ya fizzle..
I love my boyfriend.
It's never a good thing when "that" is in front of a name.
only as fat as you bitch (;
New twitter name and it's just for fun library stuff.
yes<33 and we shall cuddle :3
I'd pay so much money man...
You gotta try their Vesuvius Cake!! RT“: going to tonight with a bunch of people!! Can't wait”
Happy Birthday!!!!
My heels are to die for. Brb gonna go die
...Plus, Reggie Wayne is probably going to follow Peyton Manning. #Broncos line up Wayne, Thomas and Decker with Manning directing.
Yes. And I bet you couldn't be happier. :)
yesterday it was decided that Hollister is the Worst Place on Earth, which kicked Times Square out of the #1 spot
hey you remember how dominant Josh smith was in 2K back in the day? Lol
I would like to volunteer (if volunteers are still needed) for #mcn2010. How do I go about doing this?
Me: "Im obsessed with One Direction!" My Grandma: "I've noticed." <3
Angels we are a family don't forget that. We are not just a fan base we are family. The finest. 👌
THE GREAT WHITNEY HOUSTON HAS ONLY BEEN GONE A FEW DAYS.LETS STOP WIT THE BAD AND JUST FOCUS ON THE GOOD.
Hey all, an alumnus of Columbia Business School is working on a startup called KashPile, which has been selected as a finalist in the...
Tony Stewart 3rd at Darlington not bad
“: I cant wait to see and tonight at the #BTSTour2012 #Louisville” (Should be great!!!)
he's a keeper.
Everything moved in now, covered in 80 years worth of dust, going to take a shower and then do nothing for the next 3 days.
At the frank
its not true unless there is picture proof!
Do everything with everything that you are. Give it your all, always.
Weird.. some guy just gave me half of a peace sign.
Be sure to tune into Oxy's as he tweets his experience this Sunday.
thank you!
if an issue makes your head spin, it will undoubtedly come up on a day when half the staff is out.
Your Other Youtube!!
Saints are about to lose both Colston and Meachem. Not a PR move
Lmao this walmart has its own liquor store
Still waiting for an agent. 83:25 and counting.
In the 90's........Seatlle still had a scene and a basketball team.
Hehe ;) How many weeks out are ya?
i love how i have 50 kabillion shoes in my cloest but i only wear certain ones hahhaha
Psalm 37:40 And the LORD shall help them, and deliver them: he shall deliver them from the wicked, and save them, because they trust in him.
“: 12 babies per day are given to the wrong mother in the hospital worldwide.”
Newt Gingrich is in full-on Ralph Wiggum mode tonight.
A very productive night of Carnefix Family gambling means $45 towards #cleanwhitelines documentary about #mufflermen documentary!!!
Take-out Thai was a success, it by success I mean bloated mess. However, the screening of Pulp Fiction went swimmingly. #blueberrypancakes #
Thanks for being an awesome guest lecturer in our Sport Media class at ! Most fascinating one yet.
Not sure I want him to "deal" w/us, considering GOP's habit of smacking us down to gain points w/conservatives during campaigns.
Did the image file work out ok? Let me know if you need a hand creating it.
Amazing and talented trainer and group fitness instructor at Equinox in NYC - FOLLOW and Stay Up TO Date with
When life is too walk to handle start running!
I'd be gleeful if Glee got cancelled.
Giving up on packing. Blogging. Talking on phone. Having a frosty.
Saw that Gov. Ritter is quitting due to family concerns. Cynical, old me wonders if there weren't other, ah, concerns.
i just got a message on facebook saying they can see me. i don't know who they are and i'm in my room. ah nervous
that's a bad ass lawwwd lol
Guess our relationship like a porn star pussy! , All ova the place!
The rats are the working people in steerage.
passion - there is always something else to be learned. Passion tends to be left at the door of schools. Need passion in what we do
We bet she was really enjoying it. Who doesn't like a quick massage break?
RT": Life isn't that complicated, peoples drama makes it look complicated."
Yes! Hugs back ;D RT : Sending out hugs
oh ok! Well I hope they find that actor ok then! Yikes!
and u? Out of work already? Ready for the weekend?
RT : Congrats to Carrie Underwood & on their nominations! Congrats Carrie and kelly
Happy Hour??
Two new media industry bodies proposed
My kids love the apple sage. Kinda sweet; very tasty!
you dont know your super super super cute #seewhatididthere lol
Awesome! The collection of Dykes To Watch Out For?
Why hasn't the film vs digital debate carried over to bibliophiles? As in, "I would never read a book that was printed offset."
thanks for the #FF shout out! Happy Friday!
. Nope. But thanks for asking. cc
are pig ears vegan?
Glad your on here Weasel! Now I can talk shit to you on here!
it better be hot out because I'm gonna wear swim suit top, tank top, and shorts lol and work on my tan!
Imma hit up michal later my phone about to check
Weekend lineup at Bounce Sporting Club. Friday Sounds by w/. Saturday: Ani Quinn
your brand helps build an emotional connection between your work and your customers
I follow because of her solid leadership in our community. Thanks Debbie!
don't need the jerk part, I go to your gym just to see you😔lol and we gotta plan another day!
Back on twitter! So what's hot in music nowadays?
Stevie Wonder is a musical genius that I hope gen Y rediscovers soon. What a voice, in more ways than one.
Hey thanks for the interaction today!
at the collisium watching motorcycle racing on ice...so cool! i wanna do it! now i hav the itch to hop on my quad! you boys like Mexico
My summer gone be crackin cuz I'm goin to the A n June then Cali n July n hopefully College n August
I may not want to workout but I never regret it when I do!
Had to reassure my students who work on CATNIP that their projects mean as much to me as WFF. They didn't want to be forgotten at
people need to know RT Putting "fact" or "boom" at the end of a sentence is a good douche indicator.
And people want to bring MORE sports teams to me? How about we make my current ones not suck donkey penises first?
for sure
it's not for everyone lol
not yet. Are u in the mil
Favre deserved better treatment from GB. Looks like that decision paid off: 14-3 scorebaord
Leadership is important to innovation - direct NOT control
. I got my order in. Maybe the rest of the table will get better service now.
Just saw Pinterest logo at the bottom of a TV commercial in between Facebook + Twitter logos. Google+ logo was not included
i like
Will the #Maryland Senate/House take up the Film Tax Credit Bill this special session?
Oh yeah, I definitely did. Is this your weekend?
In 1913 today-New York World published what is known as the first crossword puzzle created by Arthur Wynne,journalist,Liverpool, England
Just had dinner in our sukkah! Love the fall holidays.
Smh. I am appalled. As my wife, date night should already be implied lol.
Can't believe those turned out so well, since I was doing everything to get in your way!
It no longer looks like IF we miss regular season games. It's how many. Or if there is a season AT ALL.
I've mastered the fine art of not giving a f*ck. Not giving a f*ck improves the quality of your life. via <<<
Will do, sir! I was hibernating! XP
I'm gonna miss my bro
I followed for ya.
My bad,you have to type" eddie-holmesj "in the search box
my boy needs some beats
TB Bucs view No. 31 pick RB Doug Martin as a "very complete back" who will be essential to HC's Greg Schiano's ball-control offense; RB1?
Ok so....Its Thursday!!!!! LADIES NIGHT!!! Come out to D.I.L.L.I.G.A.F'S in Bradley tonight to see and guest DJ Pudge.
VisionQuest's Art in the Wildlands is a terrific cooperative event - Yucaipa/Calimesa News Mirror
Columbus Chance-In-Hell.
Thanks! Lots of owl fun, I'm obsessed too. Email to you soon.
Big day...gotta finish 500 #cakepops and RGIII will officially become a
Dunno what you're up to the next two days, but I'm off, and in need of draaaaanks. hit me up. hope you had a good christmas!!
I AM YOUR BEST FAN IN CHILE, Follow Me Pleasee oh Please ! :D :D :D 37
Rubio: Look, Obama could give this same speech, only better. But the media is interested in me and I wanted a hashtag.
I was going to call my grandmother's senator, but the site's down!
At the Open Door Health Fair in Muncie, come and see us!
#TerribleDisneyMovies There is no such thing
i have so much homework & studying to do tonight :'(
. Republicans are counting, literally, on to keep the money flowing to the top.
hey, how's everything sorry I missed your birthday! Happy late birthday!
Man life is beautiful! If you ain't enjoying life you ain't livin
your welcome haha
can he scrap?? Lol
#Madison, we'd love to hear some of your favorite post workout snacks! How do you refuel after a tough workout?
Culture is the habit of being pleased with the best and knowing why...Henry Van Dyke
On one hand, I think the iTV is stupid, since I have an AppleTV. On the other, not going to buy a new TV until they are released.
Can anyone recommend a podcast hosting service? Tried today but it blew up in my face (technically speaking).
WKU and Miss Valley St should both get permanent bans from the NCAA tourney after watching that game
Dont make me come up to section 40 RT : I see you doing your thing at the game for sport marketing. You still su ...
back at you.
Best gift? The hubby got us tickets to see at the Wiltern. He's my absolute favorite and I'm so excited.
#churchplanters God. Wife. Kids. Church - Yes, in that order!
I need a lifecoach today. , help!
thanks for RT. and we have upped our game on tortillas. Can't wait to hear what you think!
Sorry for hanging up! I couldn't hear you. The FSG paperback hotline should be available now if you try again...
lol you're quite unforgettable.
you do i didnt mean to tweet that
you want to meet him too?
feeling bad i couldnt work with tonight, im sorry i love you.
Life feels better when you get a chance to talk with a collaborator for a few moments. Posting to the world a re-vamped Omeka site shortly.
It is very nice for March here in the Windy City and It will be crazy everywhere!
Once on April fools day I pretended like I was going to kiss this guy, then I punched him in the balls and shouted "APRIL FOOLS."
Have you tried the 94 Rock Dirty Blonde brew by Santa Fe Brewing Co. yet???? go to www.94rock.com to get the list of bars/restaurants.
Not a tebow fan by any means but this is unbelievable
Today is going to be a long day!!! Comicon today so stoked!!!!
i love you
seriously I just can't get enough!!! Have you seen glorious 39 it's my new favorite movie
If you don't like Earth Wind and Fire, go away. That is all.
Karzi knows that he is dead within 72 hours of the departure of American troops - he has to act out.
BTW, this is 1st rev of those MLA Guidelines to refer to "digital humanities." When they were drafted 12 yrs ago, we didn't call it that.
MAY 1ST DA LOUNGE SKATE SHOP GRAND OPENING MAD GIVEAWAYS MAY 2ND POOL PARTY KNO HOW WE DO WE KEEP AZ SEXXY
Been on 2 yrs and only at 4000 tweets.
RSVP today for the next CAM Connect at Lily's Seafood in Royal Oak Jan 28 from 5:30-8. W.cam-online.com (via )
haha he came into our room today & lifts his arm up to show me ur signature on his arm and just laughed & the nail polish lol
Howard says engineer will help find ways to improve parking despite unfinished development.
it's not funny it's irritating.
Allison do u know they are just now airing it in Venezuela Jenns dad is dying hahaha
California Dreaming <3
People of the Lower Valley. Know who your politicians are beholden to before you vote. Mary Gonzalez's list is mostly Austin lobbyists.
i'm excited about this. {RT : Want to hear a secret? We have a new morning speaker series for you—The Percolator.
So moving to LA is becoming more and more of an option for me....
nice try, jets.
Absolutely lovely place & the ambiance, decor,variety,quality food, location & economical price! Best in Baltimore!
RT I guess we won't be hearing the Fojol Brothers truck blasting any music by Das Racist.
#RTHT. Go check out His art is amazing and he is willing to draw you up something. He can do anything!
Just searched for discount wedding invitations online. Should I feel like George Costanza?
What is your #marketing strategy for your life?
Smooth sailing through tunnel right now in mountains. Could warnings from #cdot be working?
I really am! Me and my 30 min. breaks :D
CCA is beautiful...
Umm... Was someone just playing footsie with me on the train?
If the root is not killed (usually with Phenol acid), the ingrown area can grow back. Fungal nails will also continue to curve in
Probably former customer service employees for online businesses. Who apparently never read more than subject line.
there are two problems in not getting a shirt..... 1. MONEY.... 2. My parents
I AM YOUR BEST FAN IN CHILE, Follow Me Pleasee oh Please ! :D :D :D 24
Left right left right!
Tao tonight to celebrate the birth of Richard Candido!
Yes, one of your photos went in after all. Glad you like the trailer!
disgusted, disappointed....agree
I just want to go on vacation
Watching Tough Love on VH1
I believe I could live on ice cream. I will test this theory the next time I want to break up with someone. Two birds with one stone.
Well im the bass player but ya I can play some Jeff Beck hes awesome :D and we are playing this weekend in fort worth
Nothing going on this AM? Stop in 2 learn more about your Wireless Device at our free Device Workshop Today 730am-900am
Dieting for years mirrors insanity You keep watching yourself over eat crap over and over again Yet, watching obese people not diet is worse
is that something u can discuss with me? as distribution is the focus of the 3rd beyond borders:diversity in cannes panel
Seriously, people, DON'T EFFING LIE TO ME! >:|
they are nm/mint no creases
Tequila fans, clear your calendar for the evening of July 22. (And the morning of July 23, depending on your enthusiasm.)
RT : Want to win a Free promo code for iPhone app Tube D/L ? Follow & RT -
Nikon D800 low light test with the Blueman Group
Wish I had the answer
I owe you ice cream
It's very empowering to kill off a lengthy to do list.
Don't assume my tweets are about you. But if you’re affected by them, then that obviously means you’re guilty of something.
sounds like I'm missing a great presentation!
I will be There for you Even through Thick and Thin I will never fall When hope is loss -Crown the Empire- I'll always be there for her<3 :)
Everyone has someone in their life that keeps them looking forward to another day.
Normal>Dirty>Funny>Serious>Silence
I do, great show, would have loved to be on it.
How is it possible that I got to that before or ?
hunny be real (:
congratulations buddy may God help you on your journey to win super bowls for the #pats #rings RT?!?!
Every single contestant did awesome on !! Awesome performance
you were so fantastic on Thursday.
Am I the only one who watched Dino-Riders as a kid?
"has swagger so bright she doesn't even need a light". Thank you for enlightening me on the hip hop culture this afternoon.
600 YES, 600 NOTS_ STATE SO CROOKED, STATE WATCHING FOR COPS!_ TARGET US LIKE RED DOTS, YOU'D THINK IM FROM JAPAN...
Just to end the speculation: Patriots 42 Giants 24 in a blowout. Giants will score one last FG on a gimme with time winding down...
link worked this time...the world is so much better with friends, waving
a very sad day for Norway - thoughts and prayers for them!
feeling a tentative bout of sickness creeping in... emergen-c and maybe an early escape from the office?
Ha! Well they tasted pretty dad-gum good.
I thought that might happen after I saw you follow him :)
. If you have a serious inquiry you can email
Tonite at The White Swan in Houston, sat at Twist Of Lime in Metry
love the site, thanks for sending!
Nothing says "I can't wait to get out of here" like backing into a parking spot.
Come out to the Vagabond Cafe tonight from 8-11! We'll be partying it up with some live singing, and $4 drink specials! No Cover!!
I showed the UM Phil Dept's website as part of an Info Studies assignment today, they were impressed by your twitter feed :)
My Grandmom is back I kinda missed her lol
Ilgauskas probably shouldn't even be the rotation. I'm not sure his health or spot is to important at this point.
Hungry as fawk! Any suggestions?
My Christmas present to myself this year? Why, on Broadway, of course!
I look forward to it! Are you getting early to the venue that day?
I wish you were mine and only mine.
I wonder if she'll see me when she's here in August. I'll just love her and love her anyway.
At the Girls Rock Camp showcase. So excited I'm gonna puke!
4 tank tops have been claimed. 16 left. :]
tracked you down just to say that article about Pro gaming was beautiful. Excellent story telling.
how do you feel about being on SPIN's top 100 guitar players list? Weird or cool?
Quick Fact: Democrats have elected Nancy Pelosi 150-43 as House minority leader.
Falling for new cut, Falling for you....check out on youtube....gorgeous voice!!
I literally will be up all night packing and cleaning up. I'm not ready for this. Not ready to leave.
thanks to two beautiful ladies!
see you :)
People who have the luxury of not needing 40+ hr/wk job, should probably ease up on those that don't have that luxury.
Can't wait to see and tomorrow!
Oh psh that's always the goal there ;) It was a well deserved one to, might I add!
5/15-Coming to the stage at The World Famous Comic Strip Live NYC: Buddy Bolton
aww thanks for that Joy, but NOW I have to actually update it;)
no I'm cool.
100 bro RT always u kno how we do
Walk in the rain tonight felt great.
why keep doing that? lol
i never mind life passing me by when we're together, it doesn't even feel like we're wasting anything.
CONGRATS & !!! Tetraba fi 3zy inshallah. Now I have someone to spoil endlessly! ♥♥
Atten:::: ANY HALF OVERSTUFFED SANDWICH & SOUP ONLY $10.95! Thats a deal people! Stop by!!
RT : We need to rethink our mental models of Baltimore here's 1 initiative helping to do that: www.baltogreenmap.org
Two runs, nine runs, who gives a shit? #Brewers can't hit.
I just joined a ranked queue, how long will you be playing?
I HATE WHEN I HAVE TO SEND TEXT'S THAT'LL PROBABLY BREAK SOMEONES HEART!
woah that's crazy! guess i'll have to pick a sport for my kids to play haha.
Pogo by Digitalism is such a good song.
THANKS FOR INVITING ME
Former Spurs Guard George Karl gets win #1000 to put him 7th on the all time list. Unfortunately, the three above him are still coaching.
Jason, to me, you're Twilight Sparkle. ; )
All of us want an Extraordinary Life but we cannot achieve it because we have an ordinary mind.
Wondering if all the marketing stuff I see on Twitter will eventually kill it. Everyone wants to make money on Twitter. But is this good?
In the mood for a big ol' steak!!!
Oh no! I leave on Saturday... Mickey has been asking about u!
Heard a BANG. Saw someone talking on her phone run over a bush, no change in expression till she saw me run: like, what's wrong with him?
Alpenrose dairy cancels huge Easter egg hunt for first time in 50 years. Blame wet weather and saturated parking fields.
well i could use that i'm allergic to ducks and every morning those ducks swimming in my lane makes me sick
Now this is the cali weather I know
Totally agree! RT : Mobile food is not going anywhere. The City needs to accommodate in the Loop.
am in meadowhall this weekend then nottingham next weekend and are you :)x
you ever order from Mac Connection?
I don't know it all, but I will tell you what I know, never let a girl cook N your kitchen, all up N yo fridge, & next will B the stove..
one spark will shock the world.
It's to nice out to be at work.
An excellent Vw car dealership within Phoenix arizona allow you to ...
You can't judge me. Just like I can't judge you. but, God will judge us both...Let's do right!
I remember when I was in love with 's older brother. Lol!
been meaning to ask...have you read The Greyfriar by griffith? So good!
Wow this is amazing!!! It's finally here!!! I'm so proud of you rockstar. Congratulations!!!!! :)
Maybe I can scrape together the $$$ to go in person. Thank god #codcon12 isn't being run as one of those trendy unconferences.
Bout to hitta bitch
Looking for game recommendations for the Wii or Nintendo DS. Wish LA Noire were on Wii
I'm starving though
A lot of Twitter'ers are sending out spam links - it's helpful to change your PW. This has been spreading all over the place
"I met Tiger Woods this weekend & was amazed that he knew who I was" -Miles Austin. We know you too Miles! Awesome game tonight
#HURT RT What's mine is MINE and what's yours is also MINE!
Pretty delighted to be sitting in on the kickoff meeting. Bring your homebrew, snacks, and ideas to share Fri, 5/4
This game illustrates the difference between a great coach and a coach of great players.
Changed the IP address... something I learned how to do today
Canes losing to USF. Silly Miami. It's All about FIU
Idiots who think that when tweeted "lying naked on the floor." he wasnt tweeting lyrics to a 1D song.
Post some shirtless pics and then all of the thirsty women and gay men will follow you...that is how it works for most...lol
YAY. Got a new client today for another WP site. You have GOT to love word press. We're not just a blog anymore.
bad link
People hate on you because deep down they wish they was where you're at in life but just can't seem to figure out how to get there!
GET.A.LIFE. Jkkkk(; I'm still upset from earlier! Hahahhaa (:
Got invited to go boating this weekend..
is looking forward to starting work on new SAG news/sketch comedy web series w/ my wife , "Patriots N Porridge, on Monday"
It think that Ariana getting a tattoo is cool.My sister has 3. Ariana said she was only gonna get 1 that was special 2 her!
Nice seats! Like a kid in the candy store celebrating!
NOTHING WORST THEN MESSING WITH LOCK BOXES AND SCREW GUNS IN THIS DRY COLD BALTIMORE WEATHER..SMH..BUT IT ALL PAYS OFF :)
NOT COOL BREW CREW
I don't get the outrage around having Howard on that show. He's been well-behaved so far.
nothing says 'I get tons of ladies' like that question! Sexy robots!
It's a lot of fun! Our library has a really excellent cookbook collection for them too.
we're about ready to fire ours. Does yours work in Cordova?
Have you found a need to warn readers if something is science-heavy?
hanging on to my #juicefast for the last half a day!
You're a good poet.
Today: Sansome/California, Thurs: Spear/Mission, Fri: Mission/New Montgomery. Hot pies, hot sun, all week, 11-2
Guys I just hate Yu Darvish.
We're still recovering from the Super Bowl festivities. New #Carmel Daily's will start up again tomorrow!
Wow, Christopher Plummer is the epitome of class. Outstanding.
"Now is the time. Needs are great, but your possibilities are greater."
Thank u. Sorry u couldn't make the seminar.
I can't wait to see what and Double Fine do with over 3 million bucks. It's sure to be great!
Serving GREAT food until 3:30 am. Stop in for a snack or a meal. You won't be disappointed.
That's good, right? But what'll you do for the rest of the semester?
The best is yet to come...
The Apple event at Bel Aire was fantastic and hoping to learn more -- and that you will unblock me :)
aaahhhh be careful
This is poco loco! everything is going really well. ttys
ohh oh. Having meetings in the oval office with the president ?!? LOL
gain some followers, lose more followers...</3
Fernet about it!
ohh crap its EMINEM'S BIRTHDAY
Too much going on. Uggghhh
I endorse this.
Ready to rock in the rain in Vienna tonight at an outdoor venue! Who's coming?!
I could have warned you about this....
I agree love it
So so fun!! It's so pretty and you know I am gettin' all historical and vaclempt on Sopapilla! Miss u n gumbo!
getting ready to take the dogs on a walk and deliver our treats to AKA Spot!
cant find u lol..im in the back
Are UB40 tees coming back?
the rest of the game was "blah" to me. But in the end I had my fun with it when I first bought it. Still own it today :)
watches the #SuperBowl, I watch the #commercials. We both enjoy the
that's what she said LMAO!
Some are just better at hiding it then others.
still no just tel me here?
I see you @ home for the holidays I see!
we bout to be thuggin on a budget this weekend lmfao
"Easy reading is damn hard writing." (N Hawthorne) To us, #writing is a craft. We want your site visitors to read every word.
hm. . it is actually possible to only allow a value for a form field to be entered only once. .
Watching at the New Frontier in tacoma tonight! Such a fun band to dance too!!
God emailed us and said to go to 3036 n. elston to see TBONE, CENTAUR NOIR, TAMBOURINE, and more. 9pm. do it for Him.
#1 did you survive fall break and #2 how the heck was your weekend event lady hurry and BLOG it I'm dying for your story!!
Pink eye suckkkss
The most #famouslies is "I am fine"
Check out Scholars' Thursday tonight with . The night of music, poetry, trivia, comedy and more starts at 9 pm.
listening to the best singer ever, YOU!!!!
You have top love redoing something you've already done to put in your book.
I think you would be an outstanding basketball announcer. A team of you and Kevin Calabro would be epic!
Why are they booing Blake griffin after being injured, that's fucked up
love the examples used here. Great tools
seven weeks?! I only have three 0_o
you lucky duck!
Reading Security Engr 2nd ed by Anderson, Good Book
who am I? You'll never guess....
About to go up at the west side comedy theater for open mic. Might crap myself onstage
y Friday that is so long away? And I have to take my final Friday
Time for a little gun shopping today! Thanks Brett!
Cause I'm not here to fight about who's wrong or right. I just want your kiss. I wanna feel just like this 💗
Homework time  does anyone have this whole week off from school?
When you wake up with an awful headache <
Thanks to the auto shop owner who stopped by. He just earned himself business if I'm ever stuck here again in Knapp, WI.
welcome home
Why it ain't nobody at church.!?
Across dusty Egypt, anxiety has filled the air
forever and a day
Hi FJE All bst FREE E-BOOK Award Winning novel GRAY RAINBOW JOURNEY Limited Time offer Contact
Ciroc presents New Year Eve at Opium Garden Nightclub in Miami featuring special guest DJ Khaled and friends.
Reading over the FD snapshots and laughing so hard. ♥
What ever happened to Akon?
Hot Jobs: Java Server Programmer, Lead Programmer, Network Programmer, Tools,
Survey results: Services provided ad hoc
: you can call me daddy #UmmNO #thingsboysshouldNOTsay #DYING cc:
#Reading Andrew Witt's The Black Panthers in the Midwest (2007), study of Panther community progs that tries to counter usual demonization.
Just got back from taking my nephews and goddaughter to see hop. They loved it. Great cameo by
: Can't u pitch? You'd be better than the idiots I have to warm up every day
That one isn't even funny.
you know a girl is hurt when she starts ignoring you. - Drake <3
#JustBeingHonest but I really want 1d tickets to the Oakland show on jun 14 for me and
Goodnight World C U 2morrow!
I fucking hate dub step.
time to roll up and smoke up !
Baylor plays like the type of kids that will get pissed off toward the end and get someone hurt. Hope Cal notices.
IT'S MY BDAY. I'M AT THE 4731 (GRAND RIVER) GALLERY TONIGHT PERFORMING. 9PM. I WANT TO SEE YOU THERE!
Ditto! ;) RT : thanks bro! “: congrats on another gr8 edition of ! #trulytalented”
Church janitors wearing headphones and singing louder than the vacuum >
Happy Law Day! Three years ago today I learned I passed the Bar Exam.
Maybe a giant cup-o-coffee and a double-chololate-fudge-espresso cookie wasn't such a great idea. Watch out !
Just trying to help you break that 900 for your bday! Happy Day.
Yes! Let's! RT “: let's blithely lift?”
Well rest time is over! On to Mizzou New Play Series!!
Learn Chinese for the day: 大拇指 [dàmuzhǐ] thumb
Nothing frightens me. Except Glee. Seriously, WTF is this?
Who's goin to show this year with bone thungz and drake!!! Bout to be a crazy at port of Cleveland
RT: Out of regular sugar, now confronting the difficult question of 'yellow, blue, or pink packet instead?' Thursdays are hard.
Shameless plug for Microsoft in the cloud/cross channel session. I appreciate Matt Keenan calling it out without apology
Hope you and baby Briar are doing better We're praying for good news and that you will be home soon.
yes trend #fondon't
Sitting backwards on a train is always pretty weird
Thank you so much for all the support!
i hav stereo hearts by gym class heroes stuck in myy head...well i guess thts not a bad thingg. <3
Need a ride to church tonight?? Let us know!! Starts at 6
THAT is a positive finish.
Sexiest voice on earth award goes to: ! Nice meeting u at the event last wk :)
im going to try!!!
Oh, I play tic tac toe to win!
sad to see Jerry Rice put in company with no-class TO and Moss. He deserves better.
Have I told you you are awesome lately?
I really need to start changing & becoming a nicer person .
Getting a post-run workout at Metro 25-7
oh what's it about!?
Wonderful. Thanks for participating! We just added 50 pts to all ppl who did survey over past few days.
Thanks again for all your suggestions. you are quite the music pro!
I like to call #2BrokeGirls, Two and a Half Bitches. To me Han is kind of a little bitch most of the time.
One of my Bikram yoga instructors said something interesting yesterday during class: "A smile is an antidote to a heavy heart."
Thank you very much for the kind words! See you at any upcoming shows? :-)
: Yeah, I won't be making it. Thanks for the head's up:). Getting my tix for Charlotte tomorrow:)!!
the clubs over I'm with a new bitch
my place for tip off at 9:23. See you then
I had a dream that I was having pizza in English class, and now I really want pizza.
when's the wedding???
Kobo Partners With Dark Horse Comics
For the record, I'm a JB fan. But for him to go out of his way to call TR "ordinary" is just him being an asshole.
I'm on board with 2012 predictions. RT my 2012 prediction there will be a presidential election... we will still be fucked
Ooh. LEAD looks good. I need to join that.
#30WaysToMakeAGirlSmile Get her something you think she might like
By the by, we are planning on switching to a wordpress and buying a sub $50 theme. Any recommendations?
It's chilly outside! With a Rec membership you have access to the pool, fitness classes, open gym, & weight room.
You can't have a #healthychicago without nurses. See you at the ppls health fair today 11-4 @ 6337 s Woodlawn
#Np 'just begun' reflection eternal
I don't trust the church or the government
#Currently catching up on some me-projects
While I was walking my doggie an elderly lady told me the cement gets hot on their paws, so I punched her in the face.
Say Something is still my jam.
If you want me to have your email
$alute to the beautiful
I'm sure it was A LOT! Smh “: Scard to count my money from last night and see how much I blew”
Hey , told us you know about Lightshow Bob! The light wizard. Have u seen the new trailer for his TDJ episode?
RT : Season of Changes- Brian Blade and the Fellowship Band
follow me please! I love u hahah:$
good just got out of camp
I'm actually reading Dratch's right now! Working on a little review for Got me in the mood for the others!
<double wince>
So we're going to Bravo Bravo?
ha, your work?
in a interview is there a way that you can put some statement they have in to question that can make them think more on the subject
(T)wo (I)n (T)he (S)hirt lol TITS
RT “ : Give ur eyes a rest. Reduce eyestrain by looking away from ur monitor or other near work every 20 minutes.
thanks Karen!! :)
good news, considering....
I think that our fundamental belief is that for us growth is a way of life and we have to grow at all times. Mukesh Ambani
White people wear the most terrible clothes and were so concerned about fashion.
Thirsty Thursday!!! $1 off Signature drinks and Wisconsin craft beers! Who's thirsty!?!?!?!
Woo! I live for happy hour! Lol
CLEVELAND MELVIN, JOSH SELBY, AND WILL BARTON.....WATCH OUT 4 THEM
yes alcoves. like nooks and crannies.
vegan lunch..
Calling all #LUMAtics: summer open enrollment workshops are set. Mark your calendars: June 19-20, July 24-25, and August 28-29 at new HQ!
h3y haha. that was a typo but it looks cool!
Itz been along day!..
What's your favorite healthy lunch to eat OUT when you forgot yours or you're just on the road all day?
Taking it back to my childhood... Watching "Come Fly With Me"
GOOD. BECAUSE MILEY CYRUS IS HOT
The Heart is A Lindsey Hunter
I'm on the #MoneyMap Webinar with
met you tonight:) i was like the second person in line. Follow back?!
Wishing every day was Saturday night!
went to LSU, moved to Dallas, then Albuquerque - I have to cook the Cajun food - show folks how its done. you shld try NM food!
I really dont feel like being here.
Today, I'm going to attempt to run 5 miles on a 1/11 mile track.
Berezovsky Proposes Britain&#39;s Prince Harry Be Made Russian Monarch
Are they not awesome?
Alumnus, that is. *
so how is everyone doing tonight??
hookin up the drinks!
#abdl I am a mommy for adult baby's. If that's not you, if you have no personal interest here, please un-follow me!
Something shitty happens on my birthday every year... it was tradition. :)
Love is an irresistible desire to be irresistibly desired
they totally are. Take me with!
I know, I have gotten the same message before too!
Killing me, woman...
Ha! What'd he say??
Wondering if my Verizon bill will go down now that they aren't corporate sponsors for Deer Creek Music Center anymore. Yeah, I know.
Roses are red, violets are blue. I've got five fingers on each hand, the middle ones are for you
Democracy is four wolves and a lamb voting on what to have for lunch.-Ambrose Bierce
Waiting To The Last Minute To Do Something .
Wisconsin will not get a call this game.
Ok Tell Me When
hm about that last RT.. i RT'ed so i could look at it tom.. for now i gotta get some #sleep 4 real
hope you had a very happy bday!!! 😜
Today seems like a good day to listen to Dolly Parton and cry for a couple hours. Thanks brain.
It's funny how in the begining of a friendship there is a touch barrier.
Keep your eyes peeled Monday for a big announcement...
my dads notification ringtone is the light saber noise. -.-
thank you so much for making the delicious Costa Rican coffee this morning from !
half-life is shortest on twitter, longer on fb, youtube longest
Anyone with a video game system for a name is legit. Too bad my parents didn't name me Xbox.
You can post your complaint in alt.chrome.supported.protocols
seriously I think I just did a full days worth of work by 10:30. time to settle down a bit.
Who's got their #summer #fashion picked out?
“: I love me some H-Town !! Ask my friends . R.I.P Dino ( fine self ) #TrueFan”
do u think, she's a Bad Ass!
I know I'm late, but I really want him to tour with mckenzie comer. :) Cody Tour 2012
getting ready to have a taro frozen yogurt!!
good workout with
. Hey, we know that guy! What a handsome fella!
some people got murked, the O's mostly won, Bealfeld is quitting and we doubled down on grand prix dumbness.
If you love someone put their name in a circle not a heart because hearts can break but circles go on.
haha! That's what I was thinking too!
And here om the hate on LeBron.... now
I was kidding. Don't take it do literal.
Sun's out! Walkmen on park stage playin a rollickin Rat. Park bar's out of lager. Proud I've done my bit.
RT! ": Aah, naked swimmers running through the halls :]"
#3words www.DealLookup.com saves money!
m okay then.
Ha! Love the beer/kettlebells comparsion!! Happy St. Patty's Day!!
Nothing makes me want to put a gun to my head quite like the sound of moths bouncing off of light fixtures.
When did it become acceptable for youths to stand around when others need their help? My mother would KILL me if I did that!
RT if you want me to tweet a pic of myself! lol this probably won't get much RT's.
oh and I can not get that darn ASPCA song out of my head.
thanks for the follow
Blake was hella scared.
Guns and Roses. I love to be in a crowed of dedicated rockers. Waiting for tonight.
Nope... I'm not much on costumes. Think I'll just wear t-shirt and jeans. Haha!
shit small world she cold doe
A whole sleeve of stale Peeps...
Very excited about BU's upcoming website redesign launch.
lmao the only one though
R.I.P. So very sad.. RT : BREAKING: Apple says Steve Jobs has died.
I think that is considered incest. You two are sick.
This application is coming out great! Stay tuned for results.
Happy veteran's day!
Dollaz make cents!
I love New Brunswick. Makedas restaurant is my fav.
Agreed!! We're excited to be in #UnionStation. Stay tuned.
So funny. An entire segment on neuticles!
yeah lol this series is gonna be cray intense!
Drinking delish stumptown coffee from ports. Just opened on 23rd st. Thrilled to have stumptown, please just don't go the way of Starbucks.
Thursday/Friday/& Saturdays (Tuesdays/Wednesdays/Thursdays ) & Saturdays hosted by me &other promoters
Pisces New Moon "Petrified tree trunks lie broken on desert sand" What dream for the ages will u manifest into being? B still Listen 4 clues
I might not even tell you when I'm coming, just show up at your crib one day and start playing ball
WASSUP PEOPLE, CAN'T SLEEP.....SMDH.....DOES ANYONE HAVE A LIL SUMTHANG SUMTHANG OR CAN DO SUMTHANG, 2 KNOCK ME OUT????
we've got more snacks and better supper than Philly.
Header by Moreno brings it to 1-1
The worlds most interesting men don't drink "today's special" ever...
Reading white paper "A Fault-tolerant and Open Platform for Social Music" http:/bit.ly/HYfbEh
I mean, when I was a kid, I bitched about a lot I food... but NEVER meatloaf.
I like this line from Open City: "...if you're too loyal to your own suffering, you forget that others suffer, too."
Just thinking about my queen
I've got all of these ideas and concepts.. it's about time to put them into action! Definitely.
don't b fooled by tha knock offs that's goin around tho!
A funny thing about regret: it's better to regret something you have done than something you haven't - Sweat Loaf by Butthole Surfers
. #edcocp Agreed. Better tools lower barriers to entry but do not eliminate them. Network thinking is still required.
take it from the campaign He has tons!!
where can I get mac and cheese for lunch on the hill? all the normal spot i would go don't open until dinner.
I'm not stupid, I know when I'm being lied to, I'm just the queen of denial.
Hahaha!(: now that I'm a MAHOMIE everywhere I go in San Antonio I creep to see if Austin and alex are where I am!(: l
While Weeks is out, at least.
Emails labeled Urgent!, with poor grammar and ALL CAPS makes me want to help you oh so quickly...
“ Take a moment to thank the veterans of our many Storage Wars.” yuup!
How can you rebuild a military when we have no money? Ron Paul is talking sense tonight! Not a sure thing for Newt
#fortherecord I think 1-armed hugs are cheap.
If you're going to #BASHH tonight, be sure to let know how much you appreciate all her hard work giving it to us!
Today lost one of his favorite girls today. R.I.P Angel<333 May God Bless You<33
Pasta, wine and watching Moneyball with my girl.
Thank you! RT : #bethechampion for your community
Within the hour I will begin tweeting Wilco lyrics. Deal with it.
Further mute button revelations: is Ben Stiller attractive? Because with the mute button on he is kinda..... Nah.
that dude crazy , and he was balling
The Dirty Joke Show runs every night (dark Fridays). Looking forward to seeing you.
We are now watching the East German Version of Grease
"Everything will change. Nothing stays the same. And nobody here is perfect, oh, but everyone's to blame."
i want to hug it and kick it at the same time
You're welcome! Thanks for getting me deeper into the collection. Great audience.
thanks for following!!
im resting till work
Is the Ava Gardner man single?
dylan scott, answer me rn or else.
chickenpotpie radio comin on 8-9 pm. local Long Beach band Wild Pack of Canaries will be phoning in from their SXSW tour!
Interesting take. I agree on the check fees, but debit fee at $5/mo doesn't work for me. That is $2.50-$5 per transaction for us.
Conversations with the crew >>>>>
One stop shop for business financing. No upfront fees ever. No cost for advice either. or 888-819-6660
Don't limit yourself to what other people think of you.
thanks. glad the point was represented and smart albeit so not-sexy!
thought it was a bunch of pervs lol.
Just saw
I was at the light in jus happen to look over ..I took two pics..u live up the North east?
49 followers away from 100! follow and ill give shout outs to all of you!sorry caouldnt follow my latest followers. my fone sucks
#FF Fashionista Friday..
If you are impatient, sit down quietly and commune with Job.
how are you beautiful?(:
Happy Birthday!! Be Happy
I would. But I don't have ur number
Rachel, you don't stop. Every day you seem to be in a different city. And FYI, you're by far the cutest woman on espn.
Is there really any reason to not go to #Paris? I can't for the life of me think of one...
gotcha! well why don't you donate everything? :)
hm...may have to try... working on eliminating
just about ready for #SportingKC to kick off against the Montreal
yea I left in the middle of her openin them
Googling "secret island only for rich people" yields unsatisfactory results.
"that looks like all ball." #DALatUTA Does such a thing as neutral court announcers exist?
we don't hate you we love fuck all the bitches that hate you.you are the best please fuck camilla up can't stand that bitch
Thank you all & Reverbnation, for my 10 week last as #1 singer-songwriter for Albuquerque. Now it's time to land in Austin. Yay, here we go!
This game is killing me...
And that's how you end the first half!
i just got a new puppy yesterday and HER name is Moka not ahka ohka
I am just glad someone saw the poetic justice in that. Amazing.
Finished reading Decision Points by George W. Bush. Preparing for push for Cry Out America on 9-11-11 this year! www.awakeningamerica.us
What am I going to do now that tennis is over?! Oh yea.
Did you get to try them at the gym yet?
Kill Tits, Vol 1, by Quentin Tarantino
it's alright I'm feeling better now!
#ilove my girlfriend.. a lot
that's funny, I'd never thought about that
Time to get this day started
please follow me!!)
I'd duly note after sending you that link, that some symptoms may not fit at all. Some things may be intact (temporal lobe)
Exhausted and joyful. Christ is Risen Indeed.
2 hours of my life wasted. Need a stuff drink. Not a Breaking dawn fan
. will no longer sell "red-rated" seafood as of Earth Day 2012. First national retailer to make this commitment.
I jst stn here watchn my son directly n his face as I rock him as he slp if he only knew Im thkn IM D LUCKIEST WOMEN ALIVE 2 HVE A GREAT SON
Hey Kat, just sent you an email about next weeks eTail. let me know?
Problems are required for success because victory arrives only after many struggles and countless defeats.
going to try and conquer
Lol there's a funny story to that tweet.
sexist much, #Piers?
wtf twisted metal is a ps2 game made for ps3 save your 60$ and buy a good game fuck
I had a dream that Forever 21 was giving everything away for free & no one knew but a few people. Bra. I went to town.
STFU you think your cool cause you're 2 months older.. I'll have my permit before you dumbass.
Why is it Dairy Queen restaurants can't figure out the difference between a malt and a shake? I'd say shake if that's what I wanted. Sheesh!
Closed today
OH on 6th/PA Ave, mother to crying child: You are only 3 years old, get over it!
Yeah pay with $100 and tip 7%.
Damn!!! Im jealous of whomever that person will be.
It was a great show, it just left a whole slew of questions unanswered and it came off sloppy.
Did Glow Worm find his forever home? He looks like such a sweet boy!
#Java can bite my shiny metal ass.
Okay i love you too babe, goodnight :-*
So I just realized I left my book in class -____-.... that just really pissed me off.!!
Dogzilla baby! #LML RT : Set time for Simon Patterson tonight is 1230-2am! See you there!
glad I could be of service, thanks for having an easy product to sell! can't wait to see what the next couple months bring!
Lexington bound for graduation! He's a big boy now
Got any recordings yet?!
"I think same-sex couples should be able to get married." RT if you agree.
RT : Oh you have a baby on board? I'll just run into the car next to you.
It's funny, you have a gf yet you flirt with everyone. Way to be committed
Aw love! :) You definitely have a space in my mind! xoxo But what's up?! lol
There are no stupid questions, just estupid people; maybe i am one of them ;P
the one off great southwest?...yikes
Aw, thanks darling! I'm so excited....and can't wait to see what kinda crazy/beautiful you do to my hair on my big day!
": If the church sits on it's resources during hard times we are no different then corporate bankers just sitting on cash."
You know all of the answers I'm sure!
hope you are doing awesome!
“: In a world where Bill Murray exists, you will always be second best.” I know.
I need some new tunes.
Thanks to Lori Zapf who specifically asked about whether or not Earth Day would get a permit in 2012. The answer yes, but the details matter
So the world is going to end tomorrow. Please sign over all your personal belongings, cash, etc. to me by 12:00 midnight for safe keeping.
that's awesome! I'm from Seattle but my dad is taking my best friend and me!
In honor of 10 days of #SXSW, 2ay EcoClean will clean your pearl snap shirt, whether u r real ATX or poser!
*txt* thanks...
SXSW fun continues. Sick flight crew means I'm in a shuttle to San Antonio to catch a flight home.
Let's cuddle(:
I havent been on twitter for a long time. Tweet me! :D
On my way to , let's have some fun!
and a patient understanding boyfriend
Mad Men is back. I feel like I've been re-united with a long lost but slightly fucked up friend.
#Aries loves to chase fine booty. They like the chase more than the actual lay. It's the thrill of the hunt that excites them!
Thanks for listening!!
will you attempt to do it like I do in practice?
Gotcha, Thanks!
omg haven't been on this account in forever...
I already considered you the mayor to begin with! lol
Racing, eh?! What kind o' racing?
7 years, and still missing you. But your are in a much better place. We love and miss you, Grandaddy, Rev. Rogers L. Pruitt
omg yes. he's gonna die cute too<3
Friday - The best day of the week. Time to enjoy family, do something fun, kick back, relax - get the creative juices running for next week.
My newest songs are called 'I`ll Miss My Life' and 'I`m The Winner'! I can`t wait to finish my entire 2nd album 4 this year!
-_+_!| G1 CERTIFIED WET TSHIRT CONTEST --- FRIDAY CLUB DRAMA --WANT TO GET IN FOR FREE?? TXT ME I WILL TELL YOU HOW---214 609 3316 --
I need a blog idea. Can you give me topic ideas, please? Thanks!! <3
kinky roland mix is great!
Done forthe day and the only thing I wanna do, right now is chill with my baby....gt this sad feeling nw tht only she cn tke away.
Twitter is so boring when Austin doesn't tweet. Omg baby, come back!
I was in la-la-land until Monday, that's why I clapped right thru that "hope you like sausages" comment.
Waiting to hear from Facebook's head of learning and development Stuart Crabb at
yeah we did!
Sorry. I was on Ambien last night & don't remember answering back. Lollollol
Oh, shit. I should be studying D:
#18FavoriteThingsAboutJustinbieber fights for what he loves
Morning! Prob not exactly like Dallas but it's warm here(:
We would love it if the good things stayed the same and the bad things changed. We can take comfort in the fact that everything changes.
Looks like only 4 Bama players got drafted in the 1st round. Thats pretty good!
aw thank you!!!♥ youre so sweet :)
my mothafuckin throwback jam
yea I kno just holla when u want
I bet u want me now baby.
Add me on facebook
one of my all time favorite movies!
2 years ago - I sliced my finger chopping for dinner - 10 stitches
I still don't get it, I hear 90s rap I think Tupac, biggy, snoop, Dre, west side connection,...Whats wrong with that?
Just another day at the office. Looks like we still have room for more #interns! Tweet us for more info.
San Diego get to tonight! Show tweet for free bull ride!
Lets not forget, Not all of Romney's delegates are actually all Romney delegates. Quite a few of them are for Ron Paul
The morning show right on time w/ 'I Shall Live'..a small voice speaks to me&calms the current of my raging sea!
Draw Something now has ads, makin bank
Would you like free promotion? Please email me at and we'll get you started!
Where would Denver be without the ridiculous start in 3 point shooting?
don't stress! I'm sure you'll do great!
Busy afternoon of photographing & card making. Now onto some image transfers!
fair -__- but im raw still B)
me too.
i would every fucking day
Yay! Time for with John Grunsfeld () of science / Jon Gertner of re 'The Idea Factory' aka Bell Labs!
I think its funny that girls are fixing there makeup right before gym class
Picked some great prints at Handmade Arcade today.
Young professionals honor Dr Bradford C. Berk as 'Established Leader Honoree' for his role in community health
One of my favorite expletives is "Hijo de playa!"
So much makeup and makeup and more makeup! And food.. I guess
I said it's bad, but I like it. I've read another hundred pages already today. It's crack like.
whitehouse.gov would have done 1 click vote, but Amazon has a patent on it wh.gov/gEm
Make sure you apply a custom background to your Twitter profile. It will help make your profile more memorable.
May 17 is the eighth anniversary of Massachusetts becoming the first U.S. state to legalize same-sex marriage. Celebrate!
There's no such thing as long distance relationship love shouldn't be a distance
On the other hand, 24% of all NFL stuff sold bears the Dallas Cowboys logo!
only with online photo printing can you get five of something for thirty-six cents
Did you ever get your bags back from Delta?
According to the Oxford American Dictionary, "ho" is "black slang." Is that just supposed to be their word? My dictionary is racistly silent
already am following you (:
I'm in soo much pain all over!!
I add soy milk and Truvia to mine, so it's sort of sweet. But chocolate ice cream? I want your coffee!
like I said. Bye Donovan.
Juni: (to Carmen) Diaper lady! *smiles*
U cant teach a old dog new tricks
And it has all come crashing down :(
Wolfe and Monument today 11-2
Who do want to see at Comic Con?
Can you easily name your top 10 favorite songs?
Damn! Well written show! Julianna Margulies is an amazing actress!! Congrats on NAACP nod!
I just did a 30 minute dumbbell routine. I kinda liked it too.
Looking for ACTS brothers and sisters who attend HOLY REDEEMER to contact me.
lol RAM them!!
Up finna start writing ..need new ideas for songz
Only in passing so far. I might be hanging at the Hirshhorn anyway--let's go!
downsizing over the next few years, actually. there are tickets left for the second half of the night ;)
Nervous about this Saturday but i know is going to be incredible
thanks for the updates in watching it now
gggaaahhh. I have a big gig on that night! Keep me in the loop though!
Join us at tomorrow at 8 and 10 for series "Act Like a Saint, Think Like a Christian."
Really Tho~: Laker fans go hard nigga! We have riots after we win championships lmfao"
Congrats! I'm speaking too, so used up all the good ideas 8-). Hope I can hear whatever you come up with.
Staying @ the Hyatt downtown, celebrating New Year's w/ Julie @ the Grand Ballroom in Union Station....
well then this is your confession..lol
Sweet! How about showing CitySwarm some luv too David;)
I looked pretty hard at the beginning of the year, but there are always new ones! I'd love more of a magazine feel for Vegbooks
Ice cold ZICO right outside fox hills mall perimeter in Culver City!
RT : Dissent is the highest form of patriotism.
illegal import/smuggling of WIld Life, a big bus." 7:00pmE tonight www.blogtalkradio.com/creativeanimalrelief guest speaker Voney Yates
Oh, I had no doubt I wasn't alone.
She aint messing with no broke nigga.
true, but there are better and worse aspects to emulate. That Campfield got a thrill should chill everyone.
RT : yeah tonight was fun lets do it again sometime ;) x x
haven't decided if im going to come home friday or saturday
I wana get drunk to that level when I start loving everybody lol
"We're like the Sopranos in a pick up truck."
you gotta let me know how that concert went brah.
If she's talking shit about my #Steelers, tell her I'm done with her too!
PTP thursdays tomorrow night calling out all COLLEGE STUDENTS!
1st CITIZEN: This Caesar was a tyrant.
SOMEONE TELL ME HOW TO FEEL ABOUT THIS
Tweaked holiday video showing in Comcast lobby A 90-second Nutcracker sequence by the Pennsylvania Ballet and four additional snow machin
biggest reaction is always Sheriff Clarke on the horse in the Tosa parade. Not sure if he goes to others.
anywhere you can park near Sheraton Hotel & Marina? Hundreds of museum pros there for a conference--will be hungry!
Yes I said wheele
a beautiful day like today reminds me how lucky I am to live in Portland
Apparently #SportingKC GK Nielsen didn't get enough stretching before the game?
Dwyane Wade is more of a diver than any soccer player and he gets away with it 5 times a game.
Thanks for the follow - love your book so much I'm considering giving it to every member of my family for Christmas.
FOLLOW FOLLOW FOLLOW I LOVE YOU ZAYN :) MY ONLY WISH IS FOR YOU TO FOLLOW ME ! AND I WILL BE THE HAPPIEST GAL ON EARTH ^-^ <3
Calling 1 (781) 452-4077 will actually put you through to the Hogwarts Hotline, where you can learn more information about the school.
Just finished mixing the 3 demos. They sound pretty okay!
Check out Chef Andrew Nam on ABC15 "NOW" @ 3pm. Culinary mastermind behind
go then
Why don't you ever hear about gruntled employees?
Turning up the heat inside the house to 82 so that I can truly feel like I'm in Pasadena.
i turn 13 in july you?
Toni is amazing singer/sonwriter & friend 2 CTJR beautiful person. 2011 voted by 10,000 that tune in as best R&B singer
A truly good book teaches me better than to read it. I must soon lay it down, and commence living on its hint. What I began by reading,
Very important information! We must understand the effects of bullying for ALL children. Inciting terror is criminal behavior.
awesome venue. Friday is going to kill
Spread the word Reji Lefluer is human after all ...
like legit ? or just someone over 21? lol
I'm in bed but my eyes won't shut
Lost my keys this weekend. It was a good weekend, but I'd really like my keys back. or help? Need to check mail too.
we do a great job with corporate coupons
not yet tweet it to and follow him he'll followback
This is how I walk. Like Mrs. Ragsdale, my Kindergarten teacher. Maybe she was in pain--I just thought she walked like a zombie...
"just like a road block stops traffic,unforgiveness stops blessings and progress with the almighty God"-Tommy 2 Chips
me go with you.!
is working hard to produce what is MUCH bigger and greater than I am . . . which equates to little sleep. : )
arent they making another one ? Oh wait.. I think thats footloose. Nvrmnd. Lol
gorgeous! puts our PDX sunny day to shame...
Just sent a letter to the Oregonian. What have you done to save the Beavers today? How about emailing the mayor: .or.us
The #Wolman renovation is well underway. Who out there is excited?
Artful Expression: "To see far is one thing, going there is another." - Constantin Brancusi
Robin Gomez has been appointed administrator for Alvarado Hospital ().
WOW! we really DO have a lot in common! :) we'll have to talk SON! I have a lot coming up...
I just want to be there for you
I would really like to be asleep right now
happy birthday!!!! Hope its a good one!
oh. then yeah throw that #wtf tag on it
I'M FEELING A LITTLE UPSET AT MYSELF BUT IT COULD'VE BEEN WORST SO I THANK GOD FOR THAT
#NC - where you can marry your cousin, just not your gay cousin. RT : North Carolina - Where Homophobes Teabag Liberty.
tip to all re: obesity - blame and stats are less relevant than solutions. Nature + whole food access + play
Completely the opposite of what just said ": "we're looking for consistent singles, notgrand slams"
The Pirates used 3 players at 1B today with a combined 29 years of MLB experience. In those 29 years, those 3 players played 49 games at 1B.
Okay thanks, maybe that's it...I thought I saw a new sign coming off the building, like how Chazz's sign is
Matt Kemp is leading the NL in home runs, Ryan Braun is now tied for second
Thanks for helping us spread the word.
Finally got a chance to read that link and OUCH.
What the heck are those for!? U coming into town this weekend!?!??!!?!
Thanks for sharing - we can always use more publicity! *Wheels turning*
They say obese people are malnourished.
so you didn't eat that cat poop? :) if you get a few free minutes in you're very busy schedule holla at a #webdev !
Teams that lack confidence always find a way to lose. I watch my Chi Bulls 2day and they miss 4 FTs in OT @ MSG. Have confidence & make em'!
thanks frenchy! I am coming strong!
Off to the set for a feature film shoot in Malibu. The reward.
RT: hope to see you tomorrow at LIVE recording will be I'm just saying we miss u ««YES
"Two personal records! For breath holding and number of sharks shot in the frickin' face!"
Is it fake cheese lmaoRT : Mac and cheese and peppers...
A prof. told me I had beautiful writing. Quite a change from my 1st Quarter prof: "based on your writing, you should not be in grad school."
what makes me understand the paradox is his discussion on how science & the law worked to make some people seem sexually deviant
used the fancy crockpot for the 1st time & made yummy veggie curry! I love it! :)
I hope that my mom will understand that i am truly sorry
That's great news! The Brewers Bar was the first baseball blog I ever read regularly.
Cara read me a little Faulkner last night. It started to seem very weird that he's the "kill your darlings" guy. It's all over the place.
my Salsa radio show! Go Giants all the way bro!!!
yep...we have a similar schedule but school year is over June 5, summer school starts June 25. Enjoy your last week!
I wanna talk on the phone
One big room full of bad bitches : )
Interviewed owner of 101 y.o. hardware store in #Cleveland Heights for this a.m. - stay tuned for the resulting app site!
Why don't we just require them to stay home? RT : Veils, more likely. RT “: Requirement that ladies wear hats? ...
Good luck, Ozzie. Sox fans will miss you!
Tired of ham? Don't worry, our hamburgers are 100% ground chuck roll!
Accommodation is when the vertebrate eye changes optical power to maintain a clear image on an object as its distance changes.
So whats everyone think about peyton manning being a bronco!?
the run improves with time!
I'm going to try and thwart you more often.
“: I'm rooting for you Bergman!”.
In the Bay workin on the site where you can check out the beats. Hit me up if you still interested in beats. Got a few that GO
Listening to Hurricane by Panic! At The Disco ♥
Props to all of our soldiers and leaders that have lead us to this victory
Like that wasn't planned...
Tf? How am I mean by saying no?
Speaking today @ #ABIChicago09 Consumer Bankruptcy conference on Individual chapter 11 cases.
idk if i should watch it or wait....
Last time I shaved my head I regretted it. But rite now I'm really tempted to do it.
Sarah has more swag ;)
hang around successful positive people and you feel the need to strive for the best .. do the opposite and you get nowhere
Took grandma out for dinner. Amazing perspective when you have been around so long.
follow me please? I absolutely LOVE your song Cali Cali Cali!!
A noble man compares and estimates himself by an idea which is higher than himself; and a mean man, by one lower than himself. MA
Omg ur face is Like so Luke warm! Love it love u miss Colleen
My Date is Looking Hella Good in His White Tux.:-)
Meanwhile the whole stay-at-home mom debate btwn rich/poor is completely irrelevant to women who must work to make ends meet.
I like making peoples days.
You can do it! Yes you can!
Every time I hear the man speak, I am reminded of how much I hate the fact that I am from the state that once elected Rick Santorum
At the SMILE, HON: WASTE release party: SARAH JANE MILLER marvels at "the places you'll poo"...
I Feel Like A Loser -__- I Just Now Started Usingg My Twitter . Lolololololol
#morning. Reading your tweets :-P
I was kinda pumped when you RT'd me on Friday! Does that make me a dork? :-)
So, no French 3 for me this year. Can't fit it in :/
Changes by 2Pac
Overheard while playing "Honey if you love me, you'll smile": "You're thinking about dead babies, aren't you?"
Your answer wants to switch focus&does not put down the facts we presented you with about solar energy.
you got it!!!
This is fantastic.
Thanks for the RT. Apperciate it. RT : RT : "Baptized in Muddy Waters" Ayron Jones & the Way...
they play that damn song so much that I know all the words. hahahah
lmaooooooooo...STOP IT...oan I'm gettin me a petition for folks in albany to send me some jimmies...I miss them so much lol
So excited! Dreaming about the Sonoran dog I'll be munching on for dinner tonight at m!
Nothing replaces the personal connection! R RT top 2 social media tools 4 the future are the phone and the handshake
It was HILARIOUS! RT : Ignorance is bliss *laughing*......": This fool said "I got goutch" he meant "gout""
Thanks so much :)
good morning (: wow the weather ist hoot (:
It was tough watching the #Mallards get only one hit tonight before I left after the 5th inning.
that sounds so pleasant!
cracked me up on the show yesterday. "Madonna should take a lesson from Donald Duck."
Im wishing you an AWESOME race and weekend J!!! I know your ready!! #gameON --
wow lucky ;)
And what did you order?
can I wear the medalion?
I must say that Lu-Murano chandelier image was awesome. Couldn't believe what I was seeing. You take great photos. Moving.
Saw #discovery out the window of our office.
Bonne St. Valentin!- ( to gentleman that came in the shop earlier- afterward, i did remember you! Happy Valentine....)
They say bitches wear that shit so I don't even bother
I knew someone once that said he didn't like Strawberry Sundaes. What a freak. lol
totally understandable, thanks anyway! Next time
But I like you guys. We're friends. I think so, at least. We don't have to like all of the same stuff.
RT : thanks to #justfilms community: "Its not just about the product, it’s about what the product can do” --O. Bagwell
haha thank you! Well have fun eating your cookies.
Saw "The Artist" tonite. Loved it. What's your Best Picture pick?
nice . Very nice
I love the Murrays... RT : Morning run with the family!! So much to be thankful for.
Hi Twitter. You moved my cheese. Again.
Catching up on today's news: Obama supports same sex marriage. In other news: water is wet and my breasts are fantastic.
q bromar con el censor de mi
Can't wait to see it!
Tonight has been great, it's just what I really needed(:
Sure dad!!
Sources tell me the RED CROSS preparing backpack kits for 200,000... Is the BIG 8.0 going to hit? Recently in CO officials met to discuss...
Reading #McCarthy's #SUTTREE might put you off watermelon for life. #Harrogate's crime
What made me smile today:
Another friend of mine ODed yesterday, she is in the hospital. I pray she will be ok.
Another day was a waste of makeup
Retweet if u are independent and always strive for what u need follow me and I will def follow u rite back ;)
The Arizona Republic, my former (and 1st newspaper) employer, is named #Pulitzer finalist for Gabby Giffords shooting coverage. Super proud.
Also occasionally guilty in conversation, usually of the Arsenal variety. "We need to get rid of f*cking Arshavin!"
RT : Hey and - rolling with PR2.0: Your Next Step in Your PR Career in 54 minutes!
Tonight! 8:30 Mercy Lounge FAREWELL FOR WINTER SHOW!! w/ , , & Parade
His name is Head. Dick Head. :( =))
I really dont care about anything anymore .
Sounds good. We are partners with and Awesome people in CO for mobile and more!
I'm at hooters with a British kid and the waiter asked if he was Australian. Oh Jesus
Happy #CincoDeMayo ! hope u do somethi g fun (me an my fam always do!)
hey you better wish me a happy birthday saturday, or right now would be good too.
That doesn't mean you have to think the Heat won't win, but you have to at least realize and recognize the Pacers aren't going down easy
lol...wow. No sir. Was it bad for you or the other team?
Heading off to Miller Park in a min. Nerves running high. Seeds and High Life are already on
Today is my #someday will follow me? #neversaynever right? 35
you will ;)
Looking forward to listening to the new Flobots release on 3/16/10. Any pre-release buzz?
IN Quotes: "If you don't Ask, the answer is 'no' anyway, by default."
what about u ?
Woke up today at 3:30pm, definitely jet-lagged...
Toothbrush Express offers great deals on Dentek Electric & Battery and most oral care products.
Pics, pics, pics. About to post more pics! Did you get any pics of the band on tour? Post them here!
Home from Manhattan but there is no rest for the weary...Off to Rehearsal in Easthampton!!!
Lunch meat is the WORST
If God is watching us, the least we can do is be entertaining.
Coffee buzz: Study finds java drinkers live longer: Like most studies on diet and health, this one was based strictly on observing pe...
how funny let's hope u didn't know him from school that would b the worst
thank you all for following
so if they have restricted NAT type we can not get into a party with each other?
man with pretty white teeth and good smelling cologne
WORD I'm Happy For U!! I Will Be Glad Wen I Get A Job N' I Can Do Dat! Me n' My Bae Might Do Dat IDK
Season 2 of "Treme" comes out on DVD tomorrow. *Clapping*
Friends, I've been hacked. Do not open a DM from -- supposedly me. Especially do not click the link. I am SO sorry!!
Next month is my birthday and I'll be special.
'At the first sign of trouble we run away' Dr. Gerald Tanyi. #self interest
i play the alphabet all the time with my friends now. haha. its so funn.
Welcome. Heading out to ski Keystone with my nephew who's in the AirForce Academy - this will be a humbling experience!
Any suggestions for where our chief meteorologist should go live in the 5 & 6 shows today? What's happening this weekend?
Earl sweatshirt...
M, MC pie!
Setting my goals for today right now!! What's yours?
Philosoraptor: "If steroids are illegal for athletes, why isn't auto-tune illegal for musicians?"
I really hate this iPhone dont run twitter in the background
Need help quitting smoking? Today is your lucky day - Over 50% off a Smoking Cessation Hypnosis session, only on www.crowdclick.com!
"I keep it Real .. IDGAF who you are .. If I don't like you I'm Not gonna "Pretend" to like you .."
Any day full of music from young artists such as yourself is a very good day so don't ever give up.
want to vote for HOMECOMING KING?! check out the poll at www.hercampus.com/wakeforest
Happy Friday, everyone! Get in and try our Mahi-Mahi Torta, topped w lett, tom, and housemade tarter!
I am resting from site seeing :) I got a hotel room n Sodertalje :)
Great panel today on art&tech Would be great 2 collaborate on conversations about their awesome collection
Jeremy Lin this kid is going to be great he is only going to get better.
Haha...how long have you been a conservative?
CANT WAIT !! Now boyfriend is going to be beast what I'm saying is BEAST ! I love you kidrauhl !! #swag 40
Thanks for the follow... consider yourself protected
So tired of hearing about marry the night. Yes it's a good song can we shut up about it now
#FEDUP Most citizens with #AnySense will cut back SPENDING if getting close to #MaxSpendingLimit if have any choice AT ALL.
You'll never be able to find the right one if you don't let go of the wrong one.
RT : Little known Jen fact: I used to be a child model for Izod Lacoste.
Feeling so inspired! Such a great feeling watching my dancers grow in their movement & musicality, so lucky to be a part of their talents!
RT : Congressional Republicans say Obama's intervention is Libya is illegal. Unless George W. Bush says it's okay.
Fill in the blank: I love recruiting because ____________.
Chinatown date night!!!
YOUR CHILEAN!?!?!?
RT : Maddox has retired all four batters he has faced, including 2 Ks…Tucker, Zunino and Johnson due up in B8th.
i love your jacket... just like the Gordon's fisherman ;)
thnx for the support. Cell phones are trickling in gradually.
will you take a picture of your whale tail? (Your thong showing when you bend over)
I just cried a lil bit.. ": her not on twitter no more :( RT : Where is lele "
It's by far our biggest challenge-- but in my opinion also our greatest opportunity to re-think how we educate.
wwe 12 like amazing! Just wonderin if the new madden 12 will live up to what they shown monday!
thank you Matthew Kirschenbaum
would love my last tweet(:
...as distinct from social MEDIA analysis, which is about content and data on websites/networks.
I love the video! Am so excited to get this conversation started. My challenge is email & making my inbox manageable.
congrats girl!
ehhh I gotta study for all these subjects waiting for June 4, 2012 . -_-
there IS a different price... minus airfare.
We're going live!! Hello, Madison!
are you by your computer???
Oh wow " sexy and I know it " by LMFAO is #2 on much music countdown :( but on the upside "haven't had enough" is #3 :)
I just had that and it was so good
Headed to ! Gonna hear some excellent musicians and play a couple songs too.
Thanks for the follow Expat Intelligence (expatintel)! :)
Yeah it makes sense if I was using an iPad, just seemed a bit unintuitive on a desktop. Didn't know what to do at first.
RT : Sam smith: I can't name one Samuel Smith beer that I would buy again and I've tried 11 of them. Bland Euro-trash
Awesome -- Paula let me know when you're here! I'd love to say hi and meet you!
Glad to r/r after the Big Event at G. USA DOG Defenders of greyhounds event to save retired racers
Less than 10 days until I fly to Malaysia! Any suggestions on what to see while I'm there?
Making up for loss time
Wrote a new song for you guys last night.
Man 2 weeks 4rm 2day i will be in those red & white #RebokQuestions Team AI
haha! Love you too!(:
it smelt like AASSSSS ;D
Yay! You guys are so close! How is the drive going?
awesome twitter name!
Just listened to "What Makes You Beautiful" and I'm actually starting to like (why r they so good?!?!)
Anyone have a live stream for Philly-Seattle game?
woot woooot #irvine. Miss your face!!!
nurseSHANAE girl I never went back imma go order them
Watching Wife Swap while I'm supposed to be doing homework.. haaha
Don't think running and then #writing are good for earth plane. Heads in the clouds.
i agree.. 100%
nice background(;
Congrats to Chris Paul for finally getting out of the first round, though!
Rhyming n rapping r 2 different things,
Bizarre weather - it was snowing so hard around Southcenter that I turned around & went home. Giant sticking snow, but dry & sunny at home.
#IWillAlwaysLove my volleyball girls
This doesn't look live.
don't be a dumbass
Can't wait til October!!! See you at Sunlife Stadium! Miami Broward Carnival 2012!
at the end of a long hall, 1/2 way to the right left peaking your internet to see the entire thing!
Love watching ants stroll into my ant traps never to be seen again.
#themostannoyingtweeters The UNFRIENDLY ones.
The Art of Learning" by Josh Waitzkin is an excellent book which I think you would like, great insight into the process
All my favorite things in one photo.
please send us your contact info to
People if u have not read The Scorpio Races u need to stop what u r doing and go find a copy.
I haven't smoke dro n a minute....
you in a band bf?
What I need right now is a fat ass blunt..
watch it
someone put money in my pocket!
I dont mind saying im from the suburbs cuz I am...
#theyhingschodeysays I heard that one at the urinal today!
Chi's p.o.v. depends on some form of content interoperability.... more than one way to move there. Oh, he's starting to address this.
Looking forward to meeting John McDonough Pres of the Blackhawks tonight. Heard a lot of great things about him and his sucess.
The three questions you should ask in a job interview so you hear "You're hired". reports. 11pm next
When Someone Points There Finger In Your Face THATS WHEN SHIT GET REAL
When will you bring your fabulous burgers to Chicago?
Frankly, I'm embarrassed by it happening on my watch.
We've been in that situation where you're just so happy to be doing what you love to do that you get taken advantage of. - Justin Timberlake
At what time of day was Adam born? Just before Eve.
A: 6-8 of faculty from Notre Dame come to corp office & do lectures for our leadership team.
Mostly I enjoy Death Cab for Cutie more now, because I think it probably makes Zooey Deschanel sad.
Hey Everyone! Hope your New Year is off to a great start! I'm personally looking forward to a promissing 2012.
I'm just going to send my hologram to work in my place for the rest of the week. He's the other half amazing.
We are going, so if you happen to be in town...
I vote yes.
Good Morning Lisa. Thanks for bringing this to our attention. Are you able to confirm what event this is happening to?
YaHyUh...cant wait 4 V & M to get BEAT THE F*#K UP...! lol talking all that jUnk!hahahahaha
can't wait to have you! Gotta have that North Side love!
not sure....published at 825 but not yet showing up on the reader's dashboard...
Morton’s steak & seafood dinner (2 filet mignons,choice of seafood, salads & desserts) only $109.99 for 2, now thru the end of June!
Iowa right-wing politics: bad 4 America's political health as Iowa's #FriedCheese #FriedButter #FriedOreos are 4 your health
Preparing my SEX TALK for the Becoming Conference in FL next week! Getting paid to talk about sex, dating, & God... this is the good life.
I was today that you have to make your own fun
Realtor competition in most cities is fierce.There is no reason that YOU should suffer with an agent that you don't feel is working 4 you!
Allen in.... This is where the grizzlies need to defend and get the ball inside with this unit
AMEX innocuously and w/out notice raised the card fee from $35 to $45 (28%+)! THAT WHY PE0PLE ARE PISSED. We're tired of killer surprises.
was busted for weed again. Well, I didn't see that coming...
Every come see cd release party tomorrow with Crew
I miss my bro y he move to texas cali where its out
AZ punter took a knee fielding the snap...he is down right there and the Buffs take over at the AZ 28 yard line
These allergies<<<
Are you ready to Blastoff? www.my.blastoffnetwork.com/usanetwork. It's a fun, free and easy way to save and make money!!
Just super impressed with you guys for making it happen and embracing everything. Winners!
#ReplaceA7xSongsWithBanana Strength of the Banana
I'll be there, in all my glory.
Ight cool I'll hit u up
er, by all means say that about me if you wish but don't use an RT and make it look like said it!
😂 seriously tho. No te apure shell be able to meet arianna soon. Probably Saturday I'll let you take her for the morning
mine too. Gonna have lunch at cabo blanco. Peruvian joint.
how are you feeling?!
Or maybe one person doing both things?
Never underestimate the value of a true friendship or take true friends 4 granted. They r worth far more than any amount of material riches!
Thanks for the 3 hours of pre pre game show today! Made my afternoon fly bye!
im following you already
Loving you was easy, losing you was hard. Loving you is still easy, but knowing you are no longer mine, is the hardest of it all.
is developing mobile #GlattKosher concepts in New York City.
"Meditate and be aware like your life depends on it." it really does. A nonmindful life is life wasted.
About to see the Avengers, and hopefully Melissa won't lust over Thor TOO much.
#ted2012 #introverts 2) Go to the wilderness. Unplug and go inside your own head.
I wanna watch The Naked Gun all of a sudden. A classic!
Thermal Energy
At the half 10, Rio Grande Valley Magic, 0
Heading up to Ithaca to see the Cornell Johnson Museum 's new expansion! Any recommendations of things to do while upstate?
was it the Acura rdx? That jumped out at me like a sore thumb
I'm gonna try not to talk the whole day well this is gonna be super hard... (tweeting on twitter is not talking its typing words) :P
nice, how have u been?
I went from my all girls book club to the #MoVember gala. Jarring. But yay for !!
Hi there twitter fans! Thank u all for the follow! Really appreciate it!
#BecauseOfNicki Everyone pretends to be unoriginal wanna be barbies
Hope you're all enjoying spring break! Hillel feels empty, but we'll see you at 6pm next Friday for Chinese Take Out Shabbat!
even the fucking horse in WarHorse pulls a "Spielberg face"
Sometimes I just wanna call it quits and throw the towel
You didn't do that right.
Got my Troegs Anthology as a graduation gift to myself, but I also had a package from Spoetzl Brewing with three Wild Hares in mail.
Knowing you're going to be with him/her for life.
RT : The space between the notes is as important as the notes themselves. at
I wouldn't know anything about that. I have Michael McDonald's "Sweet Freedom" cranked to 11 right now.
#FF Follow Someone Awesome Sunday--->
Eating in downtown Louisville, KY. Heady beers for sure!
Exciting time to be Things looking up after months of grinding.
For the first time this year the defense picked up TB12
#sfgiants pull off big win in the 11th vs #mbrewers!
Chris Davis is not on my good side tonight.
it's worth the wait
Some of us attended. We promoted the action here & on our website. We are in solidarity w/, & all riders!
hey. Hows it going. Thanks for the followback.
So hype the bachelorette starts tomorrow!
Sir Speedy will be closed Fri., December 31st for the Holiday. We look forward to the opportunity to be of service in 2011. Happy New Year!
any hope of an android or pc version?
“: My stomach goin through changes....”<~ how far along are u? When ya due date?
WHERE AT
I know.....and cute too
“: TONIGHT!! Dont miss it **** BIG BANG THEORY SEASON FINALE- I can assure you it's "out of this world" 😜” woo can't wait
Thanks for the follow, Darlene!
beat dr.jack inna game of chess once at the homie eddielepps house in cali..
im text yu know then -.-
I have a blog idea abt a GIRLS ONLY trip to Portland, replete with a stay on the waterfront, drinks, desert, spa services.
Latest on the Hialeah shooting is coming up on NBC6 after weather
Tomorrow Thrive Lunch will be held at The Wright Place in Wausau! We will be celebrating Alfred's Birthday! Lunch menu will be available.
So we were together almost 3 yrs and u think I cant pick u out a crwd. I see u still lying, guess it was for the best. SMDH, wrds cant expln
Whirlwind is good. Radial is used by more pro bassists. email me () and we can go over details.
Happy Birthday Jackie O!
She got the Sweet Couscous, which lived up to its name, and then went about a mile past it. Who puts powdered sugar with lamb?!
It's National Poetry Month! Who's your favorite poet?
Dorothy Parker was thrown out of the Convent of the Blessed Sacrament for characterizing the conception of Jesus as "spontaneous combustion"
thats what i am saying they are amazin!!!! Inside and out
Fuck it, we'll do it live! Stage of Finals week. I hope I come out of this in one piece.
Also, you should know that is defending this decision. She says that your name is not that weird.
Late night in the office looking over applications for SSFC, SACGB, and Finance Committee.
Just tripped up the stairs in the AMU in front of my college dean
I think someone hacked my acct, sent out a bunch of "Godfather" direct messages. Please delete, not sent by me!
Beach, golf,pool? What's it going to be? Whichever it is, have a relaxing day!
Thanks, I need it :/
We'll definitely let you know once we announce pricing; stay tuned to the blog
How emotional!
Touch a girls heart, NOT her body! Take away her attention, NOT her virginity! Make a girl laugh, NOT cry! And I promise she will love you!!
Cuz that's what we do... Expect the best from everyone and anyone. But NEVER lower your expectations!! You are n deserve the best
The CURRIED MOBILE Food Truck is gonna be on Dearborn between Monroe & Madison for LUNCH today!
Makes you wonder who the magnet really is then!
Ahh I haven't played since the '09 version... But if you want to throw down in Smackdown vs Raw I will win!
love you Momma EG
Hit "LIKE" if you'd rather go out to dinner then cook tonight
Yes it is! Glad you agree! RT USF Nursing program is one the best in the state!
I can't wait!
It's not hard to make decisions when you know what your values are. - Roy Disney
Happy Birthday!
if a movie is only good in 3D, it's not a good movie. Last I checked, probably only 5% of us have 3D TVs at home.
cold, cold mountain deluge now. is charmed.
the Korean BBQ tacos, the pork buns, and the Creme Brûlée Cart (obviously!). Have fun! cc:
My father gave me the greatest gift anyone could give another person, he believed in me.
My moms cooking and that shit smells banging !!!!!
it goes well...
Anyone know if Terrelle Pryor active for today's game? I wonder if he's gonna get any snaps at WR just to welcome him to the Raiders roster.
Red Velvet cupcakes are the shit <3
Wish I was goin to Vegas for the fight this weekend
iPhone dying when you try to plug it in <<<<<<<<<<
Im new to twitter so thanks for following me!
i see you, #pandora just making changes... lookin' good!
Can you mention the bigoted attacks on his religion by Charles M. Blow and Joan Walsh?
Watching some Sunday night
switch teams? Nah I still like the sox
the world will never know how much I love you.
Just added a great basic skin care travel kit. Limu facial cleanser and ginseng mineral toner included.
670 miles to Nashville!
it only took half a bottle of mad expensive scotch, but today was a very successful (thank you) video shoot
Why am I the only one hype right now that Kid Capri is sitting by me at LAX?
Yaaal should follow (;
ahh nice, is it for your birthday ??xx
kk, sounds good. We'll respond when we get it.
#defendwikileaks Join operation payback at www.anonops.net
over here on the Blue Line, butt cancer is the least of our worries.
I finally gave in....made a twitter, follow me :D
Not all, but #AGirlDeserves to be treated with respect
wisdom teeth being pulled=pretty suckyy to look like a chipmunk hahah
lol it's cool! Some things were meant to be left unsaid. So I don't trip out
I love you Alfredo
Don't look to anyone else but yourself to find your own definition of
Harsh return to reality begins with call from bank reporting fraudulent activity on my card yesterday. Card cancelled.
when writing songs, how do u decide if it'll be a #Crüe sing or #SixxAM one?
I want to take my bra off. The underwire is very uncomfortable.
follow back? x]
warriors better stick to the script. we need that draft pick.
i think i know what hotel ur tlkn bout
Loved it as a kid. Recognize its faults now. (There are several.) But it gets a lot right too.
WBC Ticket Hunt Hint: Our Carnival Crazy will be enjoying a "WBC" glass of beer & some great food.
I forgot the Underground Podcast results again.
My phone is always dead. Sad story.
I think needs a video game break.
Offshore software development outsourcing has
And in LA, to the Opening. is off the / Party. Catch us if you can!
Throw me a free t shirt RIGHT NOW or I'm leaving.
Our Albany office has expanded and moved to 421 New Karner Rd, Suite 12. Happy to have a new engineer and new sales rep on board!
miss you more!!!
so how ya doin today
How to Track Off-Site Clicks as Goals in Google Analytics
For we walk by faith, not by sight 2 Corinthians 5:7 it is very important to speak positivity into life into your life and believe.
Man I feel good.
Does Love Field Airport have an air conditioner?
Man am I proud to be a part of #packernation. I love it!
may i ask what it is
it's like just now starting to bruise. But it's still all swollen),:
told me to stop talking to her:(
Let me know if you ever need help with promo, merch, street team stuff etc. I'm looking to intern this summer. Free is good :)
Take it to the head 
by shaving one tenth off our budget for the military industrial complex, we’d all have health care and groceries forever.
Preparing duck for the rose bowl, I wonder how badger tastes?
Happy birthday to !
it was HBO, it's over now
oh sorry friend. Branch out, but dont replace me.
Thanking God for so many beautiful blessings in my life! It's the best way to start a day ;) Happy Friday peeps!
Heads up western Waukesha county, SVR warned cell in Jefferson co heading east in next 15-20 mins.
Uh Oh. just put #UNLVMBB on upset alert against Nervous yet
Well i Love ya
Thanks! RT : happy birthday, !
My school takes the olympics thing too seriously
Things will never be the same nomore
had a really fun time at NAMM this year! Lots of cool new products and software was at the show! I will be posting all about my experience.
Im bout to do something ill regret in my entire life ......
Drive it like you stole it sister - love it! Congrats!!
LOL, that gave me a much needed laugh
Hello, is anyone out there!? Can Anybody hear me? I think my tweeter, twit, whatever you wanna call this thing is broken!
So was Gilligan's Island - I did a sermon series on that
yo 4plex brother said he tryna come to lol people are coming around :)
definitely...good arguemnts all around, good callers, not all smart, but good, haha...lets do it again soon...
Let's arrange a time and we will drop off some goodies for you!
I've talked to lots of people about my greeting cards who at 1st say that they don't know anyone in prison. Then a few minutes later, . .
1. Thanks for informing us about National Pretzel Day 2. That sounds amazing!!!
Vystar Sr VP Judy Walz just began her presentation on the Money Makeover prgm. She has 13 pinball machines!
Referring to #elit in a course title, which do you prefer: eLiterature or E-Literature or E-literature?
Just hid my shit in the freezer.
We just hope that the people that tune in have boxes!
RT R.I.P TO "DONNA SUMMER" THE QUEEN OF DANCE MUSIC!!
Let us know what you think of www.googlebump.com
See you there!
Its Time To Step Ya Game Up ... Gottah Run Ya Credit Jus To Bring My Name Up !
How embarrassing is that! Just my luck. 😳😳😂
sounds about right.
thanks Emily!
Cool, have a good sleep, bro.
Reading my old tweets.. Omfg I was such a loser.
some say quality over quantity but 8 crazy nights still is better branding than 1 night of celebration
RT : #RecallWalker crowd 50-75 thousand - tea party rally 100. Pic of tea party marching up King St to Capitol...
"He killed 80 people in the last two days." "He's adopted."
Looks like #NBC15 News at 5 will start at 5:30 tonight. We'll see you on air in about 10 minutes!
ehh, watching Wizards of Waverly Place. Cause I'm fucking cool.
In the studio... But not in the bed, i'm really in the studio. Lol. Making new music for all of you!
snow day i waited at the bus stop would prob be there if my neighbor hadn't told us there was no school lol
I will miss you SO SO much but I'll be just a text / DM / phone call away ;)
SHOUTOUTZ AND FOLLOW
bahahaha i don't want none of her diseases.
Thanks, and back at ya!
It's pontification like this that will end world hunger.
For me character is key. If I truly know who these people R & why they R in each other's lives, I can't write any story 4 them
A little rain. Then the freshness of the morning air. Noon. All hell breaks loose. Who's got the key to the weather
The answer is "it depends on who your audience is".
#devilsin7 Let's Go Devils...
Now. I honestly think Fire Pro Class is a horrible class for me!
They do? That's cool. You should take a pic of your Shih-Tzu I'd love to see it! I'm sure as it grows it will get smarter. :)
Stop stuffing everything in the initializer. Just stop it. It's bad and you should feel bad.
followback,Is Awsome related to Watch The Big Bang Theory Online
I love sleeping.
CONGRATULATIONS TO OUR IOTAS <3 WE LOVE YOU, NEW BROTHERS!
#HEAT win. Love my Twitter updates.. Info without leaving the
You have to give up the life you planned, for the life that is waiting for you.
Life is like the moon: now full, now dark
Oh, how I just love non-idempotent builds.
LyondellBasell to Address Wells Fargo Industrial and Construction Conference
Tee Hee! Just making sure you take care of yourself!
well you gotta wait for that money man. I gotta give my other baby some money first lol
I am too impulsive. I just had to dye my hair
aw you're the best. Love ya too :)
Best thing about being Cubs fan is there is always HOPE!
how you doin?
I'm in Anthro class just waking ^ from my power nap and the teacher is speaking on bipedal hominoids and things of that nature. Oh goodness.
thst would suck if he deleted his twitter
thanks for that correction on #VSPEX support for Hyper-V...
THE MID-AFTERNOON #NEWS IS OUT AT www.instereopress.com
Pacers falling apart
yes, but if you lose the ball in your own half, that much closer for counter
If 25 people tweet back to me ill have a giveaway on my #youtube tweet baby tweet!! :-)
DayQuil, NyQuil, oj, and cough drops!!! Hopefully I get well ASAP!
I am soo excited to get out of high school.
babe lets burn this world to the ground and make our own and i know that itll be perfect cause itll be just you and me
Ramona's class is at 2pm thurs, so depends on when we are done, not sure if she needs us, would be nice to see guest, fri was better
probably Davis and Miller! Hate Jones and Lamb leaving too! But sure don't blame them!
"If your actions inspire others to dream more, learn more, do more and become more, you are a leader."
Did Culberson do anything tonight? Like seeing #FlyingSquirrels actually getting a big league start.
Thanks for letting your list follow us
Now that, thats what i call a deal! :D
-.- I sweaa I'm smart! I left out my gmaa crib w/out my keys & can't get back in. SMFH !
What do you mean temporarily incomplete?
D.W.E Records $500 Talent event TONIGHT Lounge, 7402 Greenville Ave, DALLAS TX. Starts Info: Call Mr Debonair
Now hiring 10 people in Southern California! Make $1000 working part time. Call 800-774-9143 to get more information!
IM SCREAMING JSYK
honestly you're stupid because you don't have a boyfriend when there's a guy I know who cares about you alot! Give him a chance
Happy Birthday (:
I'm quite alright with you being my moment of weakness. Just promise me you'll love me at the end of it all.
Sometimes god doesn’t want to give you something you want, not because you don’t deserve it, but because you deserve better .
Why would you do both? I think Sherlock is more emotional though. The beginning & ending kill me every time!
Whts up with the Commissioners awkwardly long hugs?
you're an example for us all.
You are so sweet Vic, u are the perfect role model a girl could ask for. :{) hope we can meet someday! ♥ i LOVE you.
This weather is beautiful for January! Think I will run outside today.
might ask to model a NB t-shirt for us. I wonder if she'd be interested.
#V-Twin expo!
fans: oh hey justin bieber is here. me: HOLY SHIT WE ARE IN THE SAME CITY BREATHING THE SAME AIR. OMG JUSTINS BREATH IS IN MY MOUTH!!!!
Just had some Mushroom soup and more tea, took a break earler and swung with my daughter on a garden swing. It's a nice day today.
did anyone really expect a different result from carmelo vs lebron?
It has been a long time!!!!!
aaron.tv 3.0 will have daily vlogs of follow this martian!
What Team Is Your Pick To Win The 2012 NCAA Men's Basketball Tournament???
you're really pretty.(:
Am honored to have been invited to join the Combat Wounded Vets Challenge Expedition Team. Diving w/crew in FL Keys, July'12.
Tree pollen blows.
Thanks a bunch man! :)
"He leads me beside the still waters" for the purpose of "restoring my soul." (Ps. 23) We need to do what it takes - to care for our souls.
come to my house im bored
What do you do when something can't possibly be any more awesome? You light it on fire and watch it burn.
double you tee eff?
hahaha! Thank you so much!!
Loving the rain in Abq!
Of course it starts pouring rain right before my flight! Hope my flight isnt delayed!
Until 7pm est, get all 8 Locks for only $15! Don't miss it we're 18-9 in last 27! PayPal to to order.
good luck with the test:)
Like free stuff? Then signup for our #beta, we've got #giveaways coming soon for new users who are #Spotting on our map!...
"Joshua could you do me a solid and.." "NO!"
any practice tips? I practice 5-6 hours a day but no teach so just winin it teaching myself music theory tryn to understand it?
Lots planned for today, and now that my hangover's done I can actually get started.
M14Hoops Holiday Skillz Camp Starts Tomorrow!!!!
Happy Birthday!! Hope you enjoy it to the fullest!! Best wishes to u ;)
I LOVE how the #T'wolves move the ball around the court.
Best of luck. Voting closes tomorrow!
Rip Junior Seau. I grew up watching this guy wreak havoc on offenses. Condolences to his family and Charger nation.
that last part is true.
congrats, Tanis! Quite a feast, quite a feast!
did you get her digits?
yes- that's Lisa with an s- not Lisa with a z.....
I feel so helpless when Mike and Grace are sick. I just want to make them better....
Fighting hunger daily is the mission of Hosea Feed the Hungry and Homeless in Atlanta.
hahaaha that's awesome. 219 if you run out of gummy bears and need some sugar lol
its just a lot of the same stuff over and over again
wondering when the next earthquake will be?
Pas de slime rose?
Told y'all bitchs y'all want bout dat life! Got beat da fuck up!
If she's 9, you might as well buy any card and then add a big glittery #9 to it. Frankly that would be awesome.
Stepping away. Prayers to Mr. Seau's family and friends, San Diegans, and to all who have been affected by/are still wrestling with suicide.
Thanks for following me!
You a stupid hoe. !
nahh i don't wanna hear that shit. you saw the replay. Beckham fucking tagged his ass with an Urlacher tackle
no, just 4 me well i created by myself
Suicide Squeeze is the "new bunt"
hahaha okay ganging up against them
Content is only copy until you put some technopower behind it (through tags)
I love math!!!! My favorite subject in school.
Who is it that speaks? To suggest that others may exert powers over my own voice?
#OWS | Since there were no jobs bills & no jobs that the RW 1% politicans produced, why not bring up the important Reverend issue again?
ohh shit next period I have to take the re take for geometry I forgot about that ... ugh
All expenses, nothing less than a receipt for my youth.
“: Earth day is Sunday. How are you participating?” gardening, use little electricity and doing yoga to enjoy my earth!
More adults creating messy situations, causing pain/suffering and hurting innocent children.
i just got off the phone with em& its all set. its boutta be a hella good night xD
“ Can Anyone Believe iM Really A SHY Person? ?”really lol
"They basically tortured him for three hours. He was in a prone position he was unable to breathe." - Steve Heisler, Simmons' family atty.
We're expanding again!! Demand requires it & growth is a beautiful thing, especially in this economy.
There is no they, only us. Unknown
Its my birthday in two days, the best present ever would be a tweet from you :)
I wish there was an app that located all the pinatas in your vicinity.
Is there really a need to take finals?!!
Tonight, at The Republic House! Start time 8:30p for food & drinks and CT4 live! 12333 West Avenue (via )
I wish that all the ladies were bells in a tower...
I want to get the fuck out here.
Georgia and meridian
big booty chick back a nigga to the wall
Restoring AD for a customer, with Commvault.
I want it to be friday. These week feels long it only tuesday!
So push it--isn't seeing clearly key to CSL? And the love of God undergirds most of his mission. No? And if no, why not? :)
there's no way the new dark knight can be as good as the last one
Just cried for a bout 5 min don't care not hiding it..You don't wannaa know what's going on with me then fuck it you don't care to even ask
follow back 
Thank you for the inclusion in Experience Optimism! Have a great week!
" i do this for tha music "
maybe he won't find out what I know..I hope he is a gentlemen.
We spent allot of time on this demo album. Rich with harmonies. All real instruments, no drum machines! For Amy - RIP
Let the games begin
Interested in running for an e-board position? Applications due today!! Email us if you have any questions.
The sooner we all acknowledge that a spoon is just a tiny bowl with a handle, the sooner we can all get on with our lives.
Gov. Cuomo joined by assembly speaker and senate prez in red room for announcement on developmental disabilities...walks in to applause
thankks for hacking my twitter yesterday!! (: ahhaha
"Life is a moderately good play with a badly written third act." Ha! Maiden Monday! Voodoo
Thanks for coming! RT Great marketing committee meeting with the
nothing really. I just woke up. Listening to music :P what's up with you?
I miss our algebra class
will you be in Italy in August?
Did u get the 42" tv?
You'd have to read 10,411 words per day to read the entire U.S. tax code in one year. Maybe if it wasn't tax code we'd read it
Are you gonna cry when the Pens come back and win the series?
less then 10 .. maybe like 5. need to look
Just had the works at Clear Water car wash on E College Ave and they did a sparkly job. Avoiding puddles...
Good Night Philadelphia!!Another Paper Champion Down!! That's 2 n 2 Dayz!!!! Money can buy you a lot of things but def not a championship!!!
Don't tease me! haha
DMX is real underrated. My opinion won't matter after this though.
Joe on Twitter. Awesome!
Original Batman Adam West gets Walk of Fame star: Adam West receives the 2,468th star on the Hollywood Walk of F..
Drake on Beefing with Ludacris: “I didn’t take any of that seriously…”
haha i'm here for you girly :)
Peace and quiet..
Power shopping secret...big yummy breakfast at the Blue Star!
*headdesk* Nevermind. It helps to actually, y'know, log in. (And check that power cord!)
note there was no quotation marks. LOLOLOLOLOL. FAGGOT.
I think she finally learned how to use twitter
Q7 not yet! I cant wait for hubby to get some form of gray cuz Ive been goin gray for a while now!
don't make her no more :(
True, but why not jump at the chance to enjoy some chocolate?
Today will be spent picking out fonts for a new iPad design. While it sounds fun, dealing with fonts and iOS can get tedious.
Wistfully recalling gin-champagne cocktails, friends, Molly's Cupcakes & , Talk about a couple with a boomin' system.
thanks for the RTs for our Monday, April 23 reading at Shrine!
We love they are one of the artists that appearl on Cellar Door Records Volume I.
and I'm sorry for causing this, I bloody am. I wanna make things right again
"In 12 months Egyptians have done the impossible." --Wael Ghonim
glad to hear it's healing up! And of course I'm gonna ask brother! Let me know if there's anything I can do for ya!
Just now saw your response. Homeboy has some ill concepts. Mos def want those salmon joints!
What does it mean? Never heard it in NY.
so who goes to #cocoaheads in #pittsburgh?
yup i wanna know all of them
Sounds like someone I know....
Love it when someone gets out of prison and EXCELS!! Go Vick!!
Eagerly awaiting the alumna perspective on Mr. Obama's speech at Barnard today.
My upstairs neighbor is the loudest walker EVER.
those green pants are rad!!
I sent them already.
ahh the memories...
Graffiti rss to manage social network postings across twitter, facebook and linkedin
Librarians: Nature's Pedants
I LOVE love love love running in the morning!!!
That calls for a 2-day suspension without pay.
All menswear is now 50% off! Orgasmically low prices on men's jackets and coats, jackets and shirts, hats, belts, wallets, and jeans.
I'm in lovve with THE SONG
if there was someone in my room i hated they wouldnt be in my room in the first place lol :)
are we going to see you on Saturday at Jammin Java?
justin you rock
Less than a month until my birthday :D
FOLLOW ME!
Steelers should draft a decent goalie to back up Flower.
follow me plz pretty
thanks for checking us out man. Hope you enjoy what you see. Keep in touch.
International Conference on Earth Science & Climate Change: Avail the very few speaker opportunities available, submit your abstracts onlin…
New Study Shows US Government Fails to Oversee Treatment of Foster Children ... - ABC News
Not bad... I have lost 7 pounds this week...
From Paris to Peoria, we all eat only one variety of banana, and it's vulnerable to a fungus that seems impossible to safely control.
DONT CALL ME STUPiD Because yo` room right next to mine so i can still smack the BLACK off of you bussert
damn you
Milwaukee. The city where argyle found a stronghold.
The entire cast now discussing what looks like with his shirt off
is working hard this off season
Oconomowoc supt. Patricia Neudecker calls her plan & work "courageous" at least 3 times in her newspaper op-ed this morning.
With , you get a 5% donation on every purchase to any #charity of your choice. Don't see your organization on our website? Add it!
Wait. Did the 'Skins give 3 1s and a 2 for a 1?
Just posted everything. Probably no need to repost, unless you want to later. I think it's close enough.
RT : Success can be dangerous, failure can be dangerous. But success is the better of the two. Dana Gioia
Spent the bulk of the day working on the new website! So pumped!
I mean ur welcome and thanks for telling me
great seeing you this afternoon! Thanks for the Mormon swag to bring back to Minney. :)
I know right?!
is still adorable. It's true. Oh look. It's the Oneders or Wonders.
People with smart mouths <<<<< bag that ass all the way UP
i've never been as goofy or giggly as i've been the last hour ☺
I Ball Hard All Year Nigga!
heey! How are you!? :D
I think they always suspected it...
Oof, after a long weekend in a retirement community I'm not ready for trivia to last an hour and a half beyond the scheduled end.
$25 for a Family Four Pack at Incredible Pizza includes 4 buffets, 4 beverages & 4 game cards www.mydailydeals.com
Fantastic question! We need more groups like working to engage young people, and provide accurate information
&& it happened again.
Wow, bummer! RT : DO NOT go 64 west thru town..jacked up from king on..garbage truck & power pole do not mix
sigh yeah no wonderful peeps like u though in most slacs
Should of known better, you ain't going to tie me down
White Fence just kicked some serious ass at ! Ready for some Ty Segall?
Really cool story tonight!!! I didn't even know you were working on that! Really well done.
Whatever works! RT : I've always thought of myself as more of a Dr. Strangelove
I look at Lady GaGa then and now. Lol her ass has changed ALOT since "Just Dance" wtf happened?
i hope it crash
Thanks for the follow, Luther!
Watchingg ! I just want them to get to the bottom of this! Who's A?!!!!!
I am DEAD serious… They were awful. You could tell they were scared...
Thanks for writing it! Thanks for RTing the article on #NoGOODdeed #FF to good artists&sites!
Oh, thanks - I misunderstood!
That was an interesting throw.
So glad you're remenicing on how we met after standing me up. :-*
If yuhr happy then I guess ill leave
Proud to say I picked out Ralph Fiennes in Schindler's List, even with a nose.
D'oh!.. Damn.. I got Lotion.. On my Dress Pants.. Oop's was I to say this Out Load?
no problem. when i see the schedule ill tweet out the link to everyone
I guess I should find a Devils writer, too. And a Coyotes writer. Those would be nice to get before their seasons end.
Yea! Haha! The exact one! Then will be also coming to Jersey! Haha
Elie Wiesel: Elie Wiesel Quote of the Day: “Do I have the right to represent the multitudes who have perished? Do I have the right.."
He drank the Kool Aid before I could work on him- lives in Lawrence. If I could only convert him into an ND fan
follow u shud have some in the locker room - if not tell Leroy 2 order some -dbrown my partner
plays tomorrow! I'm so going!
will you come to montreal again really soon?:)
thanks for the invite!
THAT'S JUST MESSED UP, I'M IN SO MUCH PAIN, I'M EVEN MISSING A PIECE OF MY GUMS, AND I HAVE TO GO THE DOCTOR TOMORROW
thanks for the great article!
idk why not?
Thinking I'll put the Bloglines export into Netvibes for total all-library-stuff portal
Thanks to everyone who made Tape a success! Stay tuned for news about our annual fundraiswer coming up in January :)
If you drink, don't drive. Don't even punt. - Dean Martin
TRAFFIC ALERT: The right lane of 1-39 SB at mile post 148 (near Stoughton) is closed due to a vehicle fire. Delays expected.
Any seats left? Little Rock
Hey hommie slice!!! I miss ya crazy butt!!!
could you follow us back please?
If we let ppl , they will steal the best parts of us but if you believe in yourself n god that is enough 2 carry u past their prejudgements
$50 gets you two winners this weekend. If I don't go 100% with at least two picks, 100% refund. Purchase one day $49.99. TopShelfBets.com
Wishing all our fans a Happy Good Friday, Easter Weekend & Passover holiday!
That's horrible!!! 1st and 2nd with one out, get nothing!!
Thanks for the mention. We just started following your pins, great work.
old is right!! Haha
as I was driving home tonight I saw our little theatre in town is showing Love Actually tomorrow night.
No Problem!:)
Meeting with Twitter's head of communications in a minute. What would you ask her?
The Gramercy office market is hot. Not enough boutique inventory for trendy tenants.
Holy shit lightning right in front of me. ⚡ :'(
Happy Thanksgiving everyone! So thankful for all of our clients!
Funny Quote: The early bird might get the worm, but the second mouse gets the cheese.
#Blago missed his turn into prison again. This is getting funny.
theres only one winner and thats me.. sorry loser :)
Yes! Would love to see stats & data abt
Hope ur not sleeping with this guy when u say he's just a friend, respect ur body more than that & just use ur vibrator.
Romance is alive and well. 60 yr old widowed taxi driver just poured his heart out to me about the new woman in his life
It's a mistake to view a verbalized passion for life as bossiness.
Thanks for the kind mention, Rachel!
The Little Engine That Said Fuck It..
thanks man!
Grill out for the first time this year>>>>
-.- that's not how it went!
i like how u take down john sena
New word coined on the spot by : irresponsive. It occurred in the midst of a thick
If man evolved from monkeys and apes, why do we still have monkeys and apes?
Yeah,love babe.
Lena Dunham, where have you been all my life?!
Long time no see. Will see tonight.
Hey! Let me know how the #ProjectAcceptance pieces look after you get them tonight? #pleaseandthankyou :)
Pockets full of hundreds off zero's bills paid but gotta fat jaw I'm all bad...
have fun, and don't get into any bodies (of water) during a lightening storm!!!
follow me so I can dm you my number lady
On KXAN News Today:Austin man in hospital after a pit bull attack. Rain in the forecast, plus why Tracy Morgan is in the hospital. C u soon
if you say so...
Brain dead tonight sorry.
RRT: Thanks for the shout out!!! >> Very welcome! :)
Cheers to the for winning public service Pulitzer. Well deserved.
I've seen play at both foxboro stadiums and protect multiple QBs. #ThankYouMattLight for the blood, sweat, tears and the rings!
They are pretty damn cool
I did to Chicago. Worked out good. Not sure I'd want to brave it that far tho
Likewise! But now food comazzzzzzzzzzzz
I WILL WHEN I CAN!
#FF The only person that matters!
Each building on Williams Island has its own pool but residents also enjoy gathering at the community swim area adjacent to the restaurant.
Its 330am and berwyn 905 is on call #11. And we Haven't been to bed yet
Girls always played with my emotions lol like why?
Does anybody know a good electrician on Milwaukee's West Side? LMK!
EC: 3 dollar generals, Springfield: 37! What?
yep! Next time you're in la ill take u!;)
is at for Saturday night in downtown
Diving in to #googlerefine today. Messy expense data. Delicious.
When religion results in unity, it's great. When it results in divisiveness and quarrel, not so good.
lmao that was too funny :))
Will do when I return from Paris! 10 days :)
Which of our music videos have u watched more than once? How many times?
Thanks! Love you too
I don't care what women say!! Not 1 woman cleared snow from my door 1man did. Not 1 woman pushed my stuck car! 2 men did.We need MEN!Always!
What I hate most about Twitter: finishing a good tweet, having -1 characters left, and then having to decide which grammar crime to commi"
An artist must be free to choose what he does, certainly, but he must also never be afraid to do what he might choose. -- Langston Hughes
Thanks and for being our newest Barkitecture sponsors! This year's gonna be the best ever!
GOING TO BROWN BIRD! good luck premature tweeting strikes again!
I should do my hair now because i will not have the time to do it tomorrow
Kobe now listed as "game-time" decision with stomach ailment after he misses shootaround. Is there really a chance he'll miss this game?
That's what a deposit is for … It's your protection against this exact scenario.
Haven't witnessed a good use of "brethren" in a while. Actually, had to look it up.
Idk why niggas talkin about Lebron, he is the reason the heat are even in the postseason.
University of Houston and Rice are too far. Until I get funded I can't spend too much gas money. China is new on my plate!
thanks man!
wedges of what?
What's happening with the Helen Hayes Theatre?
Andrew Bynum need some Just For Men hair dye, he going grey and he my age!
Remember ladies, your body is a temple, not a theme park.
boner problems again? :p
Sample lyric from Madonna's latest: "You're my gangster...you're like Caesar...you're like Abe Lincoln/cuz u fight 4 what's rt" via
Watching CSI:NY
The was supposed to be named after Our Hero, but he politely declined.
We must all suffer one of two things: the pain of discipline or the pain of regret or disappointment. -E James Rohn
Sam you better fucking help out Mercedes.
At ChallengePost, we work with free software but our trash bags are proprietary
I always wanted to go to London.
will u fallow me
Artists-Registration open until 5pm tomorrow.www.ghartwalk.com
I Failed!
Here too! Breaking into every channel with Breaking News. An Amazing & Historic Day!
Lovin your skills sir.
I've started doing at least 10 min in the morning - feeling so much better!
A5: Stellar engagement: spending less money for better candidates
Thia is exactly why
Bahaha! It's official! :D
thanks for the retweet Laura : )
Thanks! RT / Just responded to your email. Also, the supercool website is looking awesome! :]
Thoroughly impressed with everyone and what they've achieved at the Javelina Jundred this weekend. Can't wait for MY first 100! :-)
I don't need a child. I have a dog that talks back just fine.
I do like supporting craft brewing in SD. Cheers to Sanders for that at least
if you dont want to talk about, then dont post it on FACEBOOK. because poeple are gonna ask you whats wrong, and you know it.
everyone knows I'll change it next week haha!
I've been on #bitchmode these past few days 😔😒
Someones In Love c;
Thanks! Good to be back!
bout to start usin twitter #networktime !!!!
I think I know him I talked to him a couple times
Never take life seriously. Nobody gets out alive anyway.
LADIES, some men love it when they woman tell them to pass the blunt & put it on 2 player
It's been a hot min since I been on here
that's a great idea. Btw. I think needs to follow you.
Since our wives our at the #westhillsdwtn women's conf. us men are taking kids to the park. Hope nobody gets hurt.
These damn dogs in my neighborhood is having a meeting on the wire. They all barking at each other like crazy late night.
:) RT : OMG! I wouldn't be able to contain myself in that awesomeness!!
depressed.. idk what's so wrong about me..
sounds great! Keep spreading the news!
I'm short ^_^
enjoyin miami weather!
has a free show at the Intercontinental Hotel tonight, music starts around 10:30...gonna be a great night!
You're welcome :)
We r in the thick of things . It is bad. Eyes barely open but still making maps.
nigga, the game ia actually good.
love the muppets
ah I cant wait to hear the new songs :D
Doing good how about you
you're loser
MAHOMIES - follow she had about 32k followers and then she was hacked.. help her gain some more(:
#FF #FollowFriday Graham Webster; Political science Ph.D. student, journalist
you better get those grades together before your mother whoop that ass Lol
Yucca comes up and candidates say offer deal that makes states compete
- I personally recommend this company for all your website work! BIG Thanks for all your great work and continued support!
Hello friends! Happy to connect with you on Twitter!
Why am I cooking? I don't even know how to cook..
ill come after exit interviews
was right, people really don't wanna see successful women.
need advice. have the thunderbolt but have an update avail. what should i go with? 4g verizon phone, and willing to wait..
If love is a crime.. then punish me. I would die for you
Highway patrol loves f*cking with ppl. Speed up, slow down, change lanes non-stop while we hover behind @ an annoyingly slow speed..
Hey! Sorry I have not got back to you sooner! Been so sick! I will text you tomorrow!
There is a sermon from a preacher describing how men are like waffles and women like spaghetti. It will explain everything lol
What do you do when your friend is about to make a disasterous mistake?
The demand for coffee was so big in the 19th centennial that at the time authentic coffee beans were scarce.
Sandy!..To late for Speed 3?
Needs his fix. A gentleman gets starts in baseball!
Hey when's the last time SI picked the mets for last place in the east? 2002?
Oh yeah I immediately unsubscribe 'em when I realized it but still annoying that it's the default.
Oh come on ! Rt : lets go
By any other name would smell as sweet. - Romeo and Juliet (II, ii, 1-2) by William Shakespeare
It's full of crazy stuff!
good food, good friends. Great fun. Excellent cause.
omg so am I that was freakin hilarious between the two of them
But self-interest can be construed in many ways. I think it is essential, but by no means the highest of the virtues.
Love ya to.
We're like oil and water, repelling each other. sings it best. ;p
Just finished doing yoga with Destie. Had so much fun! <3
My 7-year-old son on spring break with big plans for playing today: "Mom, can I practice piano after dinner? I'm on a tight schedule today!"
Getting my 6th tattoo after work tomorrow to celebrate my first time on a New York stage. :) Why ink? 'Cause that's how I roll!
A snowy and sparkling Merry Christmas to us!
Working on a Mended Arrow Store. Might even be done by next week!
Tuesday means #Trivia @ 8pm! Which talk show host married a Playboy bunny in 1961 and again in 1967?
you're awesome #nuffsaid (:
Grace is the beauty of form under the influence of freedom
Ding. Lvl Up.
you got work today?
Holy piss is intense.
I miss you!
So dam fat right now
in Houston put your number in my inbox I want you to come c me
If u lookin for somethin to do right now, go to Terra Cafe & help prepare meals for the homeless, support Neighbors w/o Walls
I'm actually about to cry.. THIS CAN'T BE THE END OF KURT AND BLAINE!!!!
hey boo! wassup?
About time theres going to be another ps3 tourney!
Thats good I will now be able to sleep at night.
A person who never made a mistake never tried anything new. Albert Einstein
Thanks. Do they replace immediately, or do you have to wait for it to be mailed?
Everyone is leaving.
Snuggling with the puppies is even better when it's chilly outside!
Making my way west from Cleveland to Seattle via American Airlines. Covered wagon would be more enjoyable--and possibly faster.
It's a good day to paint
Thanks for the follow. Looks like you're doing some cool stuff.
Just make sure you write every day. It's the hardest part, but it let's me get work done and drafts out.
I truly don't understand how intelligent people ride metra regularly: they're a textbook example of inefficiency in so many ways.
Yo Romey. Caught the premier last night, nice job like usual. Set looks great, graphics look slick, and u did what u do player
I think so too!!!! Just the fact they can be in there so cramped is crazy!
Future gens are unlikely to condone our lack of prudent concern for the integrity of the nat'l world that supports all life. -Rachel Carson
Same to you 😉
Thanks for the RT on the job openings! Appreciate it.
Looking at my past wit no regrets ..looking at my future wit confidence ...living in the present I'm getting money Bitch !!!!
no just driving through!!! LOL LOL!!!
Dammit Blues just scored.
DOUBLE THE LIAM MEANS DOUBLE THE CHANCE OF ME GETTING A FOLLOW (;
Great meeting you too ;-) thanks RT : Great meeting at the exhibition hall. A great leader in CI.
Come to hudson...dressed up though
Excited to meet with and pivotpointcom! If only we were
Yes I do! What's up??
I hate when he don't text me back, too busy for me
39 Essential Tools for Marketing Your
Aye . Saw The CUTEST Boy At The Mall . ;-*
#DailyRebellion: Getcha sexy back. We suggest for help.
next time.
not sure if it's an accident. but definitely bad karma.
Heidi Klum just filed for divorce?! Both of my girls in one month! 2012 isnt looking so good :(
#ThingsIHateAboutFacebook ...corny people always cwacking jokes.
RT if you're tweeting outside!
That was my favorite of the three.
Bought a neon pink jean skirt at J.Crew on sale and they still have some left! cc:
are you coming to dc this summer?? c:
RUNNING ON TWO HOURS OF SLEEP MAN I LOVE BEING A MOM TO MY PRINCESS BUT I HATE WHEN SHE'S SICK AND DONT SLEEP!!!
Round 2 with at or not hm decisions
Thank You as Well Honey!!! RT : S/o to for these new pieces!!!! Just tried them on and love'em...Thanks Lady!!!!
Triple booting my Mac and other fun geekiness tonight
w'sup dude.
looks delicious even in the unassembled stage. You might be giving me some motivation here.
Hey Sam!(:
I would love to hear what KSR listeners think about Friday's call. Send them my way.
I don&#39;t come on my space much u have to look me up on face book under krayon Matthews . Miss u all.
#UK is trying to take the #LA #Clippers' Lob City crown fasho! haha
I like the way you walkin' if you walkin' my way.
Have you looked into direct-to-implant surgery? My wife so happy she did that. Dr. Lisa Hunsicker in Littleton, Colo.
I love flipping through channels on tv their all so different!
Working on announcements for the website and another HUGE featured event is in the works. Trying to put it together. Stay tuned. Wow.
a pat on the shoulder for who
I'm a heat hater too.
Helping his own cause. // RT Mark Buehrle gets into the act. RBI single to right makes it 6-0
Omg I just saw that yesterday lol so funny!
also Ryan Braun is huge and is one of the best hitter in the game
Hmm...might have just had an interesting idea for a Capstone. Now I just have to somehow figure out how feasible it is.
I would certainly order one offline if I found one...
I got about 8 oreo's and a glass of cold milk. Good times
but only by a nose. And that organization shall remain unnamed (since they do some good work, horrible fonts aside)
Im one, Florida bound!!
you're not working there anymore?
Hahaha so true!!! <3 There's way to many things about Austin that I love.<3
Everybody just feels like they can relate...
a lot words are like that. big words made up of lil words with same meaning.
this is such an awkward oovoo conversation lololol
These kids are so bad o.O
#GhettoNickNames the one that pops out, was her given name: Areola
that's hilarious! When I read that, I died out laughing!!! Hah(:
Good grief! Is there ever a dull moment at your house????
you are a man amongst boys. #truegentleman HE GOT IT
BYE. Also, Voxer will charge you unless you're on WiFi ... so only do that.
In 1492 Columbus sailed the ocean blue. Happy Columbus day to all of you :)
how many pages of the kite runner do we have to read?
oh that sucks dammit guess ill cram 2moro too
nobody does. they just pretend.
Prom dress shopping was a success 👍💃💙
Its crazy to read the script of some of your favorite movies. You would be surprised how much isn't improvised.
Yes we fuck!! Bitch so what whah
"I'm feeling feisty"
It's been officially 3 days and I havent ate because I had some type of stomach virus/flu but now I'm good but still have no appetite.
I can't wait for Christmas to be here already I Want snow!!
are you excited for #BoyzHitDallas?
thank you(:
Come by to see our new displays for Texas Writers' Month and texts that emphasize the social function of the written word!
Great to hear the turbo engines again! No rain,windy in GS 6. Big names on track.
You remind me of a boy that I once knew...
is hanging out with Uncle Jesse and the Tanners.
Yep... It's about that time. Jello shots. Beers. And Call Me Maybe on repeat.
i strongly disagree.
I was hoping you'd say stop what... So I could say stop being perfect.(:
SJMC students and alumni, join #uwrightnow Wed., 4/18, to document a day in the life of Interesting social media effort!
I even tried call different radio stations but never went through! Every other website is too much money:/
Thank you so much for your blog posting! #weheartyou,
Try the pierogi as a side option at the Polish Center's fish fry!
Ansolutely love your performances tonight, you should more rock <3
I mean did you send it to me before today?
If you love someone set them free... If they don't come back, it's a good thing you had a tracking device implanted in them.
I updated my Windows XP Professional certification.
#iWishThat I could move my start date up from January 13th to NOW then I would be out of Ohio!
did someone slip something in your drink?
Well, I was just fine till I started reading condolences on my cousin's FB post of the news! I know I'll b emotional soon!!
First of what
oh gosh Montana.... What did you say?
RT : Just pick up your trash before you leave on your HuffPo busses. || good advice, thanks.
there are a lot of concerts I want to hit up between now and fall here and in chicago
Ménage has arrived...
madison. if you see this tweet me. "i love food."
Shoutout to #HouseofTruth SBP and #HouseofTruth winner of the business award. Holla and Maria. #obviously the best house.
Wrestlemania tonight at the Knight's of Columbus $10 includes tap beer soda and hot ham doors open 430pm matches start 6pm 732 badger ave SM
Seventh Suggestion, A little soft kiss on the back of the neck or a light tap on the butt followed by "I love you" is a great touch.
Agreed, again. lol.
ppl love the lotto more, that gets more love than blk on blk crime. if I win I will spent it all to stop blk on blk crime
i like her short with Jordan 3's on her feet
Ron Paul will be on tomorrow night. This will probably be the best "debate" we'll see in the next year.
UNC. Hey, Bullock name is Rodney. Cool trivia. Nice 3 point shooter.
worked on 's show today.
"Vagenda." Walter, you slay me.
George Zimmerman should of been charged in the first Degree. His intent was to kill. #Truth R.I.P
My Big Fat FAKE #Wedding" starring...#Kim Kardashian! Gee...no surprise there.
Fuck commercials mann!
Since when has it became okay to post your tits everywhere online, I thought they were one of your "private parts" damn i didnt get the memo
lol they still make those....I remember as a lil bigger nigga I had one..it was the lil mini ones
may 9 is always a good day for a b day!
not true.
Thanks, but not at the moment.
ONE RUN GAME! 7-6 Cardinals!
the cone of shame! Haha
thanks. thank you. I'm just a garden variety guy trying to suit up and show up each day. The rest is out of my hands. :)
It's going down Mon 10/10 at Cathouse. Can you come do the running man?
Awww sweet pic of you and your girls have a very happy new year!!
People who break bro code with me < GO THE FUCK HOME.
LMAO @ the dude who kept honking at me at the ATM..I guess u didn't think a woman would curse your ass out! ;)
O Scary!
Just got mail from 5starBasketball camp
When I leave class I have to fill up my gas tank
if someone would create a generic Holiday channel on Pandora, I would be much obliged.
The heavenly Maine coast !
Hey Jamie, thanks for the follow! It's always good to connect with someone from the Portland area.
ur just too much sometimes! LOL!!
See you in Columbia, restaurant recs welcome!
As happy as I can be in my boyfriend's sweatpants :)
Stupid draw something.. I just did each scene from the log song and it didnt send
so proud of It is apparent that you grew up a lot out there! Love u!
I had the ny/nj metrostars hat from the same time period, with the cartoon taxi on it.
im such a wishful thinker sometimes
Thank you. Your wisdom is off the charts.
It was ME! The chard was flowin'
working a late nite quoting imprinted promotional products. You can see your #ROI with imprinted promotional items.
Woo saaaaa... working on letting go of the past this year.
Good news! real music lives! Bad news noise/junk/trash pretending to be "music" is popular!
Officially opening in a month... Cafe and public house with brooklyns best farmers, brewers and local artisans (@ 61 Local)
Well my stars if the Memorial Day Weekend isn't upon us already! Git on down here to the Cow to kick off summer with a Texas Margarita. GU
And don't got sayin you want out of the racket...that makes people paranoid that ya gonna start chit chattin to somebody in a govt office..
16 years since the teams last trip to the SB speaks to inept front office and owner
Please donate your $10. or more today. Blue Martini Kendall is tomorrow. JOIN US 4 live music and lots of fun!! www.docit1.org
I followed!(:
Oh indeed. Fun to see those I did, hearbreaking those I didn't.
My pandering for followers is 15 followers short right now.
#ncaafinals UK all the way!
I THINK I HIT THE PICK 4
Don't cry for me when I'm gone. Just put a quarter in the jukebox and sing me home.
I CANT STAND YOU!
We had two great events yesterday! Thanks to our clients who keep us "on our toes" with fun and exciting events! Total Greatness!
Kristina kosogorova idk who she is I just saw her in the pageant an thought she looked just like you ha
So very well said. Only in Austin...
lol, got finals to worry about first bruh. Then its grind time.
Once I finish my roguelike, I think that'll be my next adventure!
It is hard to find "the answer" at this time of the year, I'm sure you and fans are happy if he turns out to be an upgrade
starting watching #Grimm I dunno what I think yet
Be proud RT : Your mom never fails to get a RT!
Well, I decided to give Twitter another try.
Just found out that a coworker I barely know is in love with me from afar. Not sure what to do with that, for a lot of reasons.
Wish I could feel better, I don't know if this pain will ever end.How do you let go of the one person who loved you more than anyone, Mom!!
Maegoo needs a Twitter, we have to make her make one Friday.
Wow. Brain Kelly gone = losing 3-30. Cincinnati you had a great year but you miss your coach.
Huge headache still!!!  on the brightside I managed to buy myself a new bathing suit!! 
Watching sweet home alabama 😊 this movie will never get old to me #favorite 💙
#totalblackout is awesome!
The weekend is so bad for e-mail! Very frustrating.
its the devil my nigga
Plezzz Follow Us ! :(
Have a kick butt rest of the week!!
thanks bud
hahaha Shes Probobly giving it to everyone But honestly I don't see what's so attractive about her. she puts out too much
solo mixing mission is on the go!!!..BORN WIT IT!!!!
My house needs a maid.
i like the way says "cupcakes ;)
Another hour to kill in the library before I record the last recital of the year.
RT The back-to-front comb over: Where mullets are laid to rest.
happy birthday Beachbody.
: whetstone for me doe
I know you're just saying that....
oh that's a good tid bit! They claim new sizes "offer more space, greater functionality, broader range of user experiences"
Did you know that the Redskins are changing their name because it's offensive? Their new name: Washingon REXskins!
Thanks for the tweet Monique
no you don't
The harder the battle the sweet of jah victory. - Bob Marley
Hell, we'll hold a bake sale ...
Family dinner nite. Drove the convertible from Palmetto Bay 2 South Miami 2 eat at the Big Cheese. Using our Miller Deal discount.
My mentions are dead
Have u entered 2win a free TShirt from on r site? www.knowledgesafari.com Seamless, tagless, super soft
Goodnight! Conference tomorrow! 💤😃
So...ask yourself this...Do you feel lucky...duck?
I hate when my mom makes thing more complicated than they are -__-
Its sad that when in Marion I have to force myself into exhaustion to get some shut eye
is so addicting and my favorite show! I can watch that show al dayy long(: Zak, Aaron && Nick are just awesome(:
Sweet! Jealous of your travels!
watching my li'l one dance around like a silly little monkey
Christmas shopping is done! Now it's time to enjoy the holiday ;)
Only ten minutes until At The Drive In!
most special tweet ever
What does Capone's vault and Geraldo Rivera's head have in common? They're both empty.
Sun stay out and chill with me, please .
thanks for a interesting and inspiring
your welcome :)
If you do not change direction, you may end up where you are heading. Lao Tzu
:3 thank you.
Daily Creative Confession with Delano Johnson: NOV14 Mine: Convert every discouragement into an encouragement. Whats your confession?...
#SaySomethin words can't say ah austin ur #awesome:)))
my work/biz and my teaching (I teach social media and strategic communication design too)
thanks so much.
Babysitting the neighbor kids later :)))
Damn wish I woulda bought that pharrell and kanye dvd
Achieve your best body ever with Hollywood Ellite Trainer Max "The Body"
: Worst regret = going against your gut feeling"
What we all witnessed last night was plain bullshit. Agbeko won that fight. I say rematch!
No trains actually passed though the Underground Railroad! Harriet Tubman: LIAR!
im so good! Working like crazy but lovin life :) how you livin?
when the hell are u gona visit??
Thanks guy!! We are so glad it went well for you.Dave has a new idea for you in regards to the coffee.Stop by for a chat
I would suggest you delete the app and re-install from the app store
what up girl??
Just booked a 4-star hotel in San Diego for only $100. Thank you Hotwire.
Have been trying to pollinate the office plants. More intimate of an experience than I expected.
Nice! I need to make it out there soon.
Hopefully that made sense lol...
That moment in a movie when the person puts someones stuff on fire,and then walks away like their bad!
It's all good
your concert was amazing <3 you made it the best valentines day ive ever had :)
Yeah, I think people are ignoring me....
didn't know that you can get A&E in a Minnie Van
At little branch in NYC kicking off three weeks of gettin busy in NY and italy!
it's going ok. i'm feeling better today, though still not 100%. drew ditched me to go golfing with your hubster.
Recession- Friend loses job, Depression- You lose job, (start of) Recovery- Obama loses job!
Relationships Last Because Two People Make A Choice : To Either Keep It And Fight For It To Last Or Let It Die
Taking over the world
Hey, dude who flips me off for honking at him in the parking lot, your freshly brewed coffee was on the roof of your car.
or will i lose myself forever.
How did the event go?!
Don't think about what the world requires; ask yourself what makes you shine.
Just saw the "flagrant foul" on Ty chandler, cmon "King James" that's a little Bitch move Lmao
I agree, it should be nice to see some more rookies getting some play best week. Newest rookie QB to start. Gabbert in Jax.
BOO! Guess I will have to survive w/o you. Needing to be centered ASAP. Sweat it all out!
Talking don't get nobody no where..taking matters to my own hands. Goodnight.
hah! I just tweeted the same question. Is Richardson worth that much more than Blackmon?
Hey Jacob. You have a great sound! Enjoyed listening! - Janice
We need some experiences asap
What are the top three most important performance indicators of this director that you want to see happening a year from now?
Who won? I had to leave at half and couldn't watch.
Bout to get my Benz washed!!
Stuck in this math tutor room until Fiona is done. Someone text me puhlease.
Scale offers ability to 1) generate lots of useful data and 2) raise capital to improve and evolve the product. Other?
#ICANN "Defensive Applications" panel for #newtlds is really about "offensive" applications to prevent legitimate competition
I don't strive to write a bestseller but I'd love to be the author of a cult classic.
Knee really hurts... Don't know what else to do?
Ain't seen his seed in 14 days that dude to weak
And on another note, no more swear words. I use them too much/for no reason
I will punch you in chest and make ur shoulders clap
The NHL's second outdoor game of the season will take place tonight in Calgary, as the Flames welcome the Montreal Canadiens .
Humboldt Center for Evolutionary Anthropology Fundraiser
get on the iPhone tip! Lol
Tina was mind fucked.
keep me honest. Can't keep all these girls straight. “: you mean "The Dragon Tattoo"?”
Found worlds best pandora station. I forgot how much I love music.
RT - Was that a great NFL regular-season or what? Lockout? What lockout?
and it's not even my birthday...
Looking 4 more support for our fledgling FaceBook page: please search on "Memorial Branch Los Angeles Public Library" & give us a thumbs up!
hey! I finally decided to follow you on here too!!
a lot of people were into self-harm, only because everyone else was doing it.
all I am saying is $214MM can buy a lot of pizza
How do you feel about the #Facebook brand #Timelines?
Singing both parts of nothing even matters by lauryn hill and d'angelo. It's crazy warm outside
#IfIWasPresident I'd be elected on Friday. Assassinated on Saturday. Buried on Sunday.
back at ya. Big hugs.
Oo will you take pictures of great typography and packaging too and send it to us!? I'm so jealous of your adventure! :)
Feel free to bookmark that and let Spidey be your mascot for awhile. I'm sure he doesn't mind cc:
I love Isaiah Andrew Neal with my whole heart. :D
I tell ya u never kno how quick ur life can be turned upside down...praying for them
Oh, Nicole. You're never in the "eavesdrop-ing mode. You're in my list of "Please Drop In" list of friends. See what I did there?
Mail order chickens. Whoa.
It gets worse -- and better -- and different. Every year is a beast in its own furry way.
aw :) your soo nice your beautiful to!!!!!!!
i'm always looking out for you cause' you're the one i miss.
My great aunt literally has a book shelf full of nothing but bibles haha
Finished seminar on Poe in Graham's. Murders in the Rue Morgue + c. 19 sheet music = awsome!!
My dream.. My black and white portrait of my unlce ": Before I die I want to get tattooed by Kat Von D."
In Limine => On the threshold, at the very outset
I ♥ turtles.
Shut up
tea for 2 and 2 for tea!
we could really use you on the show right now
Tim Berners Lee 4 rules of linked data: 1. Use URIs as names for things. 2. Use HTTP URIs so that people can look up those names
dang. I am thoroughly impressed. Way to go!
is finally starting to recover from the cold, can't wait to get better soon!!!
When you hang out with my friends a lot. It makes me feel like you are starting to like her.. And soon forget me.
Im literally startin fresh fam, im gonna send that CD if thats what i gotta do. just a hungry ohio MC here
THANKS!! i even figured out how to change header pics! :) i love yours too-- looks AWESOME. go us!
Most eating places serve outlandish amounts and some still claim to be "healthy." Um...
“The world is full of magic things, patiently waiting for our senses to grow sharper.” ― W.B. Yeats
Joining us during Denver Restaurant Half Month for Alligator Baby Back Ribs, Escargot Pot Pie or Fried Frog Leg Mac n Cheese?!
GO DODGERS!
Soon, there will be nobody left but marketing people, on Twitter, all pointlessly marketing to each other..
Watching #FindingBigfoot with Scott in our #GoneSquatchin shirts!
Listening to #Maxwell...Stop the World
We would like a #kosher food truck in our city as well. Let's get one rolling through the U.S. and Canada!
Why no timeout especially if that's the shot you are going to get you have 2 left
Wtf is going on?????
What about Huskers defense in 2010 and 2009? Huskers lead nation in scoring defense in 2009.
um.... where have you been the last 1.5 years!
then we all got bikes and followed.
I took a few pics in Vancouver and that was the last time. I regretted doing it because I didn't remember what was happening.
"plays violin"
Don't talk to me in the morning unless its about sex, bacon, or more sleep!
#youcanttrust a big butt and a smile
Looks good!
well then you knew that so why you put a ?
have a great tour!
From the ones I've seen, yours are creepy though -_- RT Lol I get the same shit for my tats
I have SCaLE envy
He who lends a book is an idiot. He who returns the book is more of an idiot. Arabic Proverb
I got out of school before the seniors did and passed ALL my classes(:
Many thanks!
Everyone laughs at me because I dress differently, but I don't care, at least I don't pretend to be somthing I'm not
Life w/out Salsa dancing would B a HUGE mistake; so WE have U covered. Visit us at For class schedules, and events.
Stayin your seats and not sneaking up is for the birds and suckers #yemsg awesome
chillin and u punk xp:)
Today: "Lady Gaga is great and everything, but I would literally crap my pants if I met Beyonce. I don't even know if she's real."
Add some joy to your timeline
Bet it's gonna look cute.
Woohoo! online northwest:best conference ever.
Shopping in Harvard Square: Those sneakers are cute. Oh, they're $470.
Ima hang this phone up.
followed! :D RT: FOLLOW ME on VIDDY!!
When I decided to go natural, it was a 10 month internet process--could have written a book in all that times watching YouTube
S/O to the speed dating group at #EVilla yesterday. We hope some connections were made!!!!!
Thank you!
On set, day 2 of filming Pioneer/ Pandora Commercial!!!
Second day of class at new MMA school. Jiu jitsu today my favorite!
i wish i could forget about him already, he doesnt even miss me like i miss him :c its killing me inside but outside i have a fake smile on.
sometimes that has a habit of collapsing into a heap...
Home page is re-designed. Looks much better. Sales page should be up and running soon. Maybe I can get out for a round now.
Marcum sharp through 6 and gets hit with singles-Crew needs these games against Padres after last road trip.
Its sunny in Seattle!! Happy Sunday.
To help International orphans, there needs to be best practices in orphanedges. There are currently none.
i feel bad for all the babies born today.
nice to have you back
No I don't know everything BUT I do know enough to make me Dangerous!
Surprisingly, on this first day of wearing shorts in 2012, my legs are not as translucent as I had expected them to be.
Im going to buy an electric guitar :) if my mom would let me :| but i wanna lear how to play it though :)
to 11:11 and now to #SAYSOMETHIN !You have came so far,I'm so proud of you!<3 I love you ; your song is perfection! <3 11
A Good Friday & Passover wish to all...
Even better in person!!
link isn't working
Much of the American coverage on #Egypt is disgusting. It's all about the Muslim Brotherhood. Proving their ingorance about this whole thing
of Faith...looking forward to an awesome evening
My teeth hurt. Is that a bad thing?
I just want summer at this point.
who is this 76er fan now court side in Boston? Floor seats at home, in CHI, now Boston.
S/O to You did good boo :)
": So, how many of you have actually seen the very last scene in THE AVENGERS?___ ME
Have you ever tried sleeping with a broken heart, well you can try sleeping in my bed <333333
When you can feel someone staring at you<<<
In North Carolina discussing sustainability projects with two agencies.
Bout to rock out the grill. Hand made burgers... You don't even notto
NICE!!! "SCHOLAR/DANCER
Sprint outside in a bathrobe & boots or miss garbage truck?
just wanted to say I'm thinking of you. Interesting year to work at All Sports Museum, or any sports museum.
Damn somebody got killed in the trappers
My broker just emailed me. Says I can get a "free" 32 GB iTouch4 with Bose Headphones....if I deposit $75,000 in my account! LOL
"The biggest adventure you can take is to live the life of your dreams." My mentor-Oprah Winfrey
I'm a follower :D<33
Lol for a second I thought you said, "I hit that." And I was like man my memory is bad lol.
Supersonic Acrobatic Rocket-Powered Battle-Cars. Its a sports AND racing game, right up your alley
dont you feel accomplished? Seriously leave 1D alone they never did anything to you so STFU
Thanks Amy!
Sigh...I know, right?
and it's Abercrombie who knows how expensive it was sorry julian
Can't wait for 's new music(: It's going to be amazing... I just know it<33
The Throwback Mixtape is here!!! www.CalDashE.com
. + back-end interface to edit mostly static pages, because he'll eventually pass the site off to someone else.
discovering new music, reminiscing with old music
Awww, thank you!
Blueprint is fixed. There are other responsive frameworks though that you should check out. :)
I think you can! Check out YES - Your Event Source in #clt. They've got everything!
LIKE if you are waiting until the last minute to do your holiday gift shopping!
Keep a few bad b*tches in my circle
Temple Run.
Only thng I'm willing to commit to now is Benjamin Franklin :)'$$$
I used to be bummed if I lost 10 solitaire games in a row. Now I'm bummed if I get 20 or 30 boring stumbleupons in a row.
#dsoc #sla2011 Jennifer Darragh speaking on Sources of Polling Data- pros & cons. Gallup Brain is one.
Country Music Show Host Needs Great Face for Radio, No Joke
we also participate and have specials with foursquare.
feel free to come ALL the way south to FL!! :D
Friday nites at VIBE LOUNGE tomorrow!!! Early arrival is strongly suggested; Message me 4 table reservations or free entry. See ya tomorrow
Killedd The Stagee Tonight!! They Better Stop Playing With My Emotions & Just Crown Them Already!!
I've seen too much pre-Barnes mediocrity to want to run him out too.
A very basic gym - for $49/month w/ no committment plus $100 enrollment fee. Sounds steep. what do you pay?
Not living up to the name...
I don't beg for followers. All have free will to follow or not follow.
It's 's sweet 16 today! Please wish her a happy birthday!54
2012 Phenom Camper Jr Phenom: Justin Roberts ⁰Rising 8th ⁰Indianapolis, IN ⁰Travel Team: Indy Hoosiers ⁰Point Guard 5’11
Not going to Cali anymore change of plans so gonna hit up the gym soon for a couple of lifting sessions! Later!
STAMPED-N-DIVAS ARE THE HOTTEST DIVAS AROUND
Same to you!! :) RT : thanks Boris :D happy holidays!!!!
Headed to Capital summer party Wednesday night. Should be a great group of people from SF startup scene
A TV can insult your intelligence, but nothing rubs it in like a computer and a wife.
Show was canceled tonight just for my band...the guys cant make it in cuz the city is nuts with hurricane-itis
Where you point out that cons are closet soc. (I think that statement is a bit of an exaggeration. They have soc tendencies).
Twitter rocks my socks
10 Facebook Tips - Become friends with people you don't know. They might be creepers or stalkers, but it is more interesting than Farmville
Good Morning Sunshine! I love waking up to see sunlight pouring in every window.
hey what's Carter's handle?
RT ohh! sorry it took long, havent bee on twitter for a couple days = its all good lol
First Thursday tonight, 7:00, at ! Free breakfast for dinner with speaking some truth!
hey dude :)
I meant hit me up cuz lmao!!
I have ((ZERO)) tolerance for bullshit!
Wake up! Grab a brush and put a little makeup! Hide the scars to fade away the shakeup!
I agree. Thanks for both your responses.
Indeed you do!
hahaha I definitely should have studied...
Imma bad, bad man! If anyone knows what song this lyric came from, please tell me. Thanks!
ATTENTION CHICAGO!!! WE HAVE BULLS TICKETS FOR TONIGHT AGAINST THE MIAMI HEAT!! TWEET US IF INTERESTED! GO BULLS!
Questions are the new Answers
Despite snow, well over 100 adventurous people came out to our Purely Social at Harbor House last night! Such a great time.
In social media, Two-way conversations are essential in order to be recognized by your customers
Bumpy bumpy interstate and bad road. This is what ice and snow does to asphalt. Sort of makes me understand the 'why' of the 'Big Dig' PA AM
Hope you all can come out and see UB's own stylist Nina work her stuff at the Austin Fashion Week kickoff tonight!
How early would YOU take him?
And my room smells like potatoes >.>
asked by one party to misrepresent a fact to another party - this mediator said "I think not!"
Heard it for the first time yesterday...tell me why I'm bumpin' to Boyfriend.
SHOUt Out my new follower!!!!!
gotta date today (:
LOLOLOLOL! The OZ!
wake me up when it's wednesday!
Hahahah that is so typical of him. Good thing you left - saved urself boredom, confusion, and his weirdness
I do love my boots! Must be genetic ;) RT : Wacky Fact: Boots have been worn since around 3000 bc!
at church .❤
Thanks for the follow Friday Kiri!
I hope I don't offend rappers, when I decide not to put my drink in the air.
Taking questions now. Anything you'd like answered?
Fun afternoon cleaning out my twitter. If you can't follow me back you are dunzo. Dunzo, I say! Unless you produce stellar tweets.
Almost at 3,000 fans on facebook! Thank you for all the continued support.
Douche bag
Thinking is sometimes all you have to do.
Just woke up. I feel well rested..
You know what sounds fun? Running from the bull in Spain. It's got to be awesome and terrifying when you see the bull single you out.
because you've finally realized your purpose In Life...
too much talking not enough doing
Great stuff this morning. Election results, dancing with Patrick Paolantonio, and tips on cheap travel
Very talented. Slow motion takes lots of skill :)
If it's free, it's advice; if you pay for it, it's counseling; if you can use either one, it's a miracle. - Jack Adams
Sometimes I feel like I don't even wanna do this sh*t anymore...
#Fact. " drake provides wonderful life inspiration."
Men Using Kazakh Flag to Collect Trash May Face Jail
Looking for a SAP HCM Functional Analyst in Houston. Great company, great benefits - direct hire. Will pay for relocation.
#ff my favorite form of therapy:
just gave me hope!!
Check out all of our YouTube videos at www.youtube.com/Promolast - Lex Luger, DDP, Kimberly, Ernest Miller, Ron Simmons, and more!
I am so mad right now god pick u your phones!!!!!!
#orphans8 CHILDREN LIMITED was Kodachrome original showed up Sonochrome Labs materials. Hounded custodian forever to get.
#textmefirstalready ! Please:p
Thuggin' on a glorious day
Wonder when they'll recognize in México that the big winner of the Battle of Puebla was the U.S., that's why huge celebration in the States
Vote for AT&T Goal of the Week, Wk. 21
and back at you. Happy Moms Day! RT : BuildingMoxie Thx much. Have a great weekend.
making the most of this gorgeous evening by finishing another 1k on the WIP. #amwriting in fresh air....the best way.
at 5 is coming your way! Join & for news & weather!
Staring at a picture of a cute dog while listening to a Barry White song = Best Laugh Challenge
agreed, Saints in NO gonna b tuff as hell regardless who's coachin
Prof. Dan Wallace made "1st Cen Mark" claim while debating Bart Ehrman at UNC earlier this month. Will send link in few min.
call me now
Get one project done just in time to start two more! Bye bye freetime... Hopefully we will meet again.
Thank you for instructing #insuranceagent CE at today.
Come Explore w/me & on the free trolley! Look for the green shuttle stop signs throughout South End!
Had a great time at the info session this morning! Time to get started on my application for the Non Profit Mngmt program!!
good win for Rashad Evans tonight.would have loved to seen a knockout,but a win is a win nonetheless.really hope he gets his belt back.
I would give up my swoosh account for a guaranteed discount on Air Jordan retros...hands down
HAPPY DAY
Great day today... thank you hydrobikers! See you this weekend!
I hate pointless conversations.....
Aw tell your Mommy I said "Hello:)!" I haven't seen you all in so long:(! I'm only gonna be here for a week:(!
#FF These guys are Defining Sports Performance every day in Combine training.
=(( RT : BREAKING: Penn State coach Joe Paterno near death, family summoning close friends to hospital for final goodbyes.
NKOTBSB in DC tomorrow! :)
Audience is nice.
Slept for 2 hours. Tired. Eyes are puffy and red. It's cold. I wish my hair would grow faster. Doesn't feel like a Friday.
I'm watching the latest episode of #TheWalkingDead ...will I be disappointed? Love the opening scene now it's on 2 the soap opera, oh boy...
Have a great evening!
Q1: drink a 10 oz glass of tart cherry juice
I have #Swag (: enough said
good choice...ive never made homemade banana bread before.. gotta see if i have enough bananas! lol :]
To clarify, this event Daniel is hosting is at 6pm this evening. Bring artistically and politically minded people!
Philadelphia district attorney says his office will no longer pursue the death penalty against And the work continues....
Getting another iPod touch.
Courage is the price that life exacts for granting peace
thanks shell :)
BatteryPower.co is open!
How many starters will be in the Miami Dolphins’ rookie class?
So good at procrastinating. Frikin midterms-.-
HU Art Department Student Body Meeting today from 2pm - 3pm in room 3001 of the Fine Arts building.
+1 RT : Great new diet plan- I've lost 4 pounds this week. It's called Norovirus diet.
I gotta admit, I'm a bit of a Jerk Off
I'm busy busy busy today
When did "You're welcome" turn into "No problem"? Is "Thank you" a problem?
Hey! What's the deal with being able to sell tix directly thru facebook? Possible? Not possible? Thanks!
what are you 90?
GUYS. TIME FO' BADASS BIEBER IN FOUR DAYS.
No accurate thinker will judge another person by that which the other person's enemies say about him. ~ Napoleon Hill
those are cute. Did you get to the j crew sale
I haven't gotten into then yet but I hear great things about from my friend !
RT Quick Fitness Tip. Walking is a excellent way to get exercise. If you're too tied up to do any other exercise, walk.
you can do it!!!! Hoorahh
i missed the pregnancy project D: what is this movie about
I mean it's all good til the vikadin gets out of my system like now lol I just need to sleep it off
vinny loved tonight's episode... IT'S COS YOU SAW MIKEY, ISN'T IT.
#NP: The soundtrack to my success, ”Pledge Allegiance to the Grind2” #KillerMike dirty south classic
lol, but i work at wendys n i dont know if my schedule that flexible
The Internet's Dumbest How-To Videos: Viral Video Film School
Did you read the crime briefs? Hysterical.
thank you kind sir! I need you to always come out with us!
great edu-tech meeting tonight. met a lot of wonderful people working to build innovative tech into classrooms.
Late Friday lunch? Not a problem, we serve lunch until 2:30pm!
Tebow will get #Tomahawked tonight!
My uncle been in the feds for 5+ years, i know he ready to come home
Today is the first day I've turned on my computer since last Friday!
I really wish I was joking!!!
Hang in there. Sending good thoughts your way.
Jackson's Fury vs. The Rhodes Warrior
Ya know ive always had a crush on but when i followed him it got even huger!He is so downtoearth &sweet!nothing like malfoy kinda
my email is
#TwSIG Can bring Twitter into CMS, such as Moodle.
Now for closing statements. One minute each.
Love is the word used to label the sexual excitement of the young, the habituation of the middle-aged, and the mutual dependence of the old
Goodnight my
alright you are lucky ;-)
How It's Made - Canola Oil
- my guess is you'll need some pretty strong drunk goggles later, so drink all you want
“Photography is a small voice, at best, but sometimes one photograph, or a group of them, can lure our sense of awareness.” -W. Eugene Smith
Thanks to Kenny Shepard for the LIKE!
Singing mahler's 2nd again tonight w Madison symphony. Love the piece but wish we were in an outdoor venue on a day like today!
He won't need to score this much it would be nice but not realistic. It's on Wade and LeBron plain and simple.
good day Tweeps....off to work as its Monday morning in this part of the world.....
Packing my bags for sunny San Francisco!
S/O to my boo It's her 21st birfdayy! Happy Birthday love! Hope you have an awesome day! 🎂🎉🎈🎁💝🍻🍸👏😘
The medical alert unit in ten years will be what cell phones are to people today.
Any Japanese artist who work in NYC and has a website can apply for our plan. Pls contact us through direct message! We'll send u detail.
Well today has been a long day... So far.(: hahaha.(:
Performing magic tonight with Jason at the Wilmette Theater. Our unborn child reads minds.
redneck optimism: beauty is in the eye of the beer holder
heck ya GURL TELL IT!!
Ii Don't Feel Like Fixing Anything , So Ii Got Me A Bowl Of Cereal.
The final poster designs are coming up for #Rising, #Knock, #Rings, and #Prism. and I are hard at work on them. -JO
Cheers to all #mothers out there! I raise my glass to you:)
T.Swift won 2 Grammys :D but Adele totally stole the show
hey sexi. The defense caasted too much doubt. The state had a burden without a cause of death in a murder trial.
dude in south Florida (fort myers)........
yeah love you to. Lol
: "Thirty minutes until the next train." You're a joke! Get with the program. My goodness!
I just don't know. Its like I'll never learn.
OMG I know! lol I'm doing wonderful & you?! :)
I followed her!
you give the best advice on visiting though!
(~Math 366 ^ ~work) is logically equivalent to (fun v weekend)
Was that cayenne or paprika I just dumped into the soup? Good god I hope it was paprika because that was a lethal amount of cayenne.
terry are we going to LMAO concert ? :)
Made the 5:04 train. I ❤ Express Trains!!
Just don't let Mrs POTUS plan the menu!
I see your Imagination is all over the place my I dig it. Shows you hungry and being yourself.
Attention seekers r always losers :)
Now. You're. Talking.
#Foxtrot is great technology for revenue cycle management. Data maintenance in core systems is automated which saves time and makes money.
how are you
Thank goodness for #traderjoes lobster bisque!! Saved my day!! With a pretzel roll, makes the world feel alright.
you had me at 'hello
whoa, that's a biggie. I remember my nerdgasm when I first got to go into the CCLA server room as a intern
Hmm that piercing wasn't as bad as I thought it would be
#NOTAEUPHAMISM!! (this time)
ok thanks
nope! Haha not at all
AJ Burnett is a true warrior!
i gotta go buy a big razor! Mom won't let me use ours :(
And I hang around big dogs ain't no taming me.
Lauren is so rude (rollin my eyes) i can cry if i want to. I FEEL TERRIBLE !
It's so damn funny how people try to pose but they Always usually get busted
Does anyone want to donate a short bus, or know of anyone selling one?
"If you don't care it doesn't matter." - Grandpa Cunsolo
lol MAYBE. oh I thanks
Seriously LIKE CRAZY was the only one of the four that I haven't seen/cared to see! Thief! There, I said on Twitter.
Gorgeous here as well in the Big D...glad I found you on here!
"View change as the one constant in your life. Welcome it. Expect it. Anticipate it."-Denis Waitley- Thanx 4 the reminder, !
Great! Happy to hear that. Welcome back.
RT #FITB ____ always talking about they at the Gym..But its been a year & no results LMAO ...
Be yourself & don't compromise your values. Doing so is a quick ingredient to problems later on.
Oh!!! It didn't say who those were from. :) Thanks!
dont like this new version of twitter
So far on the campaign today I've been through: Leeds and New London.
How does everyone have their EOC scores?
Please tell me I'm not the only one pissed about the NHL all-star game roster.
For those that asked, you can follow me on Twitter
Also, will companies measure and reward innovation? If so, how?
With ordinary talent and extraordinary perseverance, all things are attainable. ~Thomas Foxwell Buxton
explains that incubator classrooms give ea student a laptop & have moving chairs and tables so WORK can be done
EURUSD is about to go south it looks like...I'm expecting a minor break out in about 15 minutes...8:30pm EST seems to a special time
Agree, but wait to you see Robert Griffin I next season...the bar will be reset
SLA - "Service Level Agreement" ?!
NUS UK has teamed up with their official partner GO TREK USA to offer students a chance to win a 7 day trip for two in the USA
In Here
why can't the world just have one big party? so many pictures and dancing ah i would so go! =)
same avon Indiana haha
yelp i just woke up so its gonna be a long night haha so time to jam out to some ac/dc and others and play battlefield 3
Thank you Lord for protecting Please continue to protect, guide, and #bless him. Watch over all the Jonas family and fans.
Pompa: evidence shows that states choose to spend their money in other ways.
Too intelligent for our country.Lock'em up, scar them w a felony & tell them get a good job & don't come back
listening to speak is so refreshing. A CEO totally in touch with both his brand and also what customers want.
Yes, Yes, Yes! I was in The Artist & actually lived with Berenice & Michel last year while filming!
lets get it!
I'm scheduled to work at for a couple more weeks.
for those of us not there -- thanks for the tweet updates!
I hope I can see u soon
#Starwarsshakespeare Double, double, toil and trouble Fire burn and Dagobah bubble
More live videos!!! Like the setup you 2 have.
I'm a lucky gal, got to start my day with some fabulous ladies - thx for the coffee date and !
Which month is your favorite in Fort #Lauderdale? I actually love August. It feels quiet and mysterious.
One Of The Most Prettiest Girls ----->
I hope you study this carefully
HEY guys! Hope today was the start of a great week! ☺
Smiles are the only universal currency.
so you build on iPhone and they actually mail a card for you not email???
Bring a friend for free today only!! (Must be a local resident)
Halftime: #Hawks 40, #Celtics 40. Atlanta outscored Boston, 25-19, in second quarter. Paul Pierce: 9 points. Joe Johnson: 11 points.
thats the idea: a childhood of go-sees. Since college is for douchebags anyway
Tried out Last.fm on the xbox 360 today... pretty sweet!
The usual this weekend - party, trouble, women. Set for Ireland in Aug, should be having some fun in Chicago and Iowa this Summer.
hoes be quiet
Idky I even freaking attempt
Waking up, More coffee!
Did you hear? will be on today 4-5pm sharing tips 4 mompreneurs & talking abt
Goin' to sleep good night In the morning.mabe.
Happy Monday everybody! We made Top 10 for "Barbecue" and "Bar//Night Club". Make sure you all vote every day this week!
"Say hey to the UP, eh" on a green flag shaped like a mitten doesn't have the same ring as "From my cold dead hands."
First super warm day in #seattle today, taking bets on how many of my students will show up to class today
It was the one and only song I ever learned on my guitar. Since forgotten. My hands are too tiny to play my acoustic. #
Brian Urlacher is a great defensive end.
Yes Happy Mothers Day Gretchen,also why is Dianne Feinstein even walking through the doors on Fox News Ewwwwwwwwwwww
LLN Reports on William R. Patterson, Author and Speaker - May 03,2012 Mike Boehler and Michele Rempel reports on William R. Patterso
Break a leg babe!
Jack Nicholson
Bearcats back in action this upcoming Friday and saturday against NEO. Friday, double header at 12pm. Saturday, one game at 12pm.
Never, under any circumstances, take a sleeping pill and a laxative at the same time!
I'll take full credit!
Kicking off PAIN rehearsal today! Excited :)
'Abdu'l-Bahá is talking to 500 people at the Hotel Euclid. He speaks of the advances of material civilization, and its dangers.
Here we go!! Lights are down.
I hope this goes well.
About to clean the house
Gotta get some zzzzzs in before the baby wakes me up. Man I miss uninterupted sleep!
:O 2 hot guys!!
"It is the greatest of all mistakes to do nothing because you can only do a little" ~Sydney Smith via
Today is Tuesday!
woah! Stickers?!AWESOME! Walls get ready cuz your gonna be filled with stickers(:
Timbers sign Colombian midfielder Diego Chara as a DP. Chara comes to the Timbers from Colombian first-division club Deportes Tolima
On our way to meet at Really looking forward to it.
What a great memory you have! She designed the purse 2 weeks ago & picked it up Tues. & loves it. (Oh, & belated happy b'day!)
I got u!! RT : somebody tell dont stop sendin music cause the events over..lol we break records outchea ...lol
Parents forgot to feed me):
Wanted to say what up. HMB native now in ATL. Big fan of yours. I Intern on Braves Radio. At 680 here in ATL.
I should be Video Blogging that for the fans JL!
Holy crap is getting punked
It's almost the weekend! Come in to pick up some movies to watch before those first papers are due
Where is sexy ass?!
Lmmfaoo!!!! Just Osi for me boo boo!!!! This pussy has his name engraved in it.
Strangers are just friends you haven't met yet. Get out there and meet new folks!
Love talking with !
You are a rockstar therapist! Keep up the great work!
lol I have nothing against her.
Never made kimchi. Until now.
damn straight
damn I liked that one also where did u see they canceled it
Habak got 7 blocked shots smh most of from the 1st quarter i'm sure
brink let's just go
Mixed about #Madonna's half-time show- loved the #classics- can't get behind the new song- I feel like its like
I dont let too many people get close to me, because they always try to use me.
GOAL: Romney 60% Obama 40% as repudiation policies NOT the man. Win the middle with intelligent, reasoned, respectful appeal w/o demonizing.
I am recruiting my twitter followers :) Thank you in advanced for your support.
New special: 2 slices of pizza, 1 topping-your choice, & small drink for $5+tax! Ends 5/9!
living life in the slow lane this week. Off from work, being vegetative. How goes it with you?
Been absent from online-land for a few days. Missed my fellow twitter tweeters! Welcome to all the new followers! Thanks so much!
RT if you have a teddy bear
Please check out my blog when you get the chance.
: If anyone needs 500 FREE Business Cards or 500 FREE Postcards come check us out www.800printingnyc.com today
"leave me alone!!!' *leaving* "wait!!! where are you going!?"
Thanks for all the love. I made the first cut! Round 2 next Sunday.
Bringing a sign to tonight's game that says "Wizards, shoot the ball, not each other. Thank you."
Jobs in the housing market: no job training, immediate employment now, reduce foreclosure rate, retain or increase value in existing homes
lol they don't want it bruh!!
So Bored in woman terms means So Lonely
When im stuck in a situation I just stop wherever I am and just think
It is kinda funny when you are at a store and they ask you "are you finding everything okay?" and when you say "hi... actually no, I ne ...
I wish my big brother was still around...R.I.P. Marvin Jr...he would always have my back...
What one player will have the biggest impact in this Sunday's AFC and NFC title games?
thanks for the follow :-)
- we wish you could be here too! We will be live-tweeting & blogging, so follow along :)
I think my sister had to put that on the application for her certificate for solemnization. I wonder if they have to match...
I wish I had my own office. Productivity would spew from the walls #toomanydistractions #whatwasijustthinking?
Just figured out I can use the iPhone to do ustream, so I'm going to go live in about 20 minutes. Stay tuned please
lucky, my school is just bad.
thanks so much for following! :)
Dreaming Happy
"I hold speckled shag carpeting in the highest regard" - Keith Hensley, haha very nice. -PS
#Clippers played some short bus b-ball down the stretch.
My STS students are writing technology bios--probably most excited to learn about history of pane glass windows. Yes, I'm serious.
This decade needs a new Neutral Milk Hotel album.
oh I meant trying to round up and trying to make it even
Kez McCorvey on our campus today. Says hi. Good luck up north. Pride & Poise!!
Thanks so much for the
Check out review of Harumi: almost vocal inflections of intricate participation...the violin as lieder singer...
cool! Thanks Cara! :)
Haha!! No problem..... You know you chuckled when you read it!
Slowly raises hand
Happy Monday everyone. Looking forward to beautiful #ABQ temps this week - highs in the 70s & 80s!
Come on! One more Grilli!
me too, you should just come and visit me for like a month at least!
Messing around with ThinApp by VMWare. I might have a new favorite application!
140 characters isn't even close to what I need to say right now.
stupid brother tells me i have to work tomorrow at 5, thanks for the notice!
Everyone here at Evidence Based Apparel is supporting you!
RT : Totally agree! RT It's my favorite day of the year here at : pajama day.
Me too. MUST get it together second half.
Who's got a great downtown (Austin, TX) 3-bed/2-bath property for lease? Anyone?
Stop being a dinosaur and get a fucking job!
what a child
Just programmed the shit out of UNcensored w/ trax from + more
Yeppers! It's time.
Well... it's going to be one of THOSE games, eh?
People that give New Jersey a hard time have never been to West Virginia
It's snowing! Woohoo!
did I just see you at MIAD?
Woohoo! Belated congratulations to you! Something to celebrate tomorrow. :-)
RT : Dear Mother Nature: do not mess with this weekend. Please and thank you.
": Yees he is!! & he is just 20! Lol RT : Is it just me or is Leonard REALLY cute??!" I've seen cuter, lol :-P
No one cares ;) RT : The hole in my tights is slowly getting bigger.
Nope, I will have to look for that. At the time I was more Doobies, J. Geils Band, and Aerosmith (oopsie)
haven't seen one wearing channel or gucci. Lol
Thanks, , for following. Did U see La Traviata at Met Sat? What did U think of set?
Not yet but I hope so.
Lol I choked at your tweet. lol nigga you are too funny. Oops I meant cute.
Taco Bell??
Flips show tonight! Alright!
happy birthday b ♥
Worst music for the NFC game
smiling that you favorited our tweet. Thanks! Today was a beautiful day spreading positivity.
ahahah yes i do and i already have
Thanks for the follow Matthew. If you're interested in funding the release of a project for our launch, we'd love to talk!
Hey you should follow me! :) Miss you guys! Happy Winter Jam!!
Connectivity issues will be the death of us all.
Anyone ever seen a Bruin in Boston? No? Ok.
'tis fabulous! Love the amalgam of classic & new steampunk
What is an Android dvlpr? I worked with Droid for many yrs. Couldn't get him to do sh*t. Not the position for me.
HEY CAN YU PLEASE FOLLOW AND LET HER KNOW THAT I SENT YU! PLEASE IM TRYNG TO WIN A CONTEST THANKS SO MUCH XO
Well good night foreal !^_^ **nigh**
CORRECTION Sunday Social is 830pm. We're dumb early in the AM. Forgive us.... in person by coming to the show! See what we did there?
#OneThingILove late night talks about life
Note to self: when pets come running to you with a look like 'what's the shizzle in the basement' make hub go down and see
yay yay! Miss u too!!! Glad ur on twitter;)
I'm up in my room throwing down on some Ray Charles.
no it doesn't. Who wants to by new shirts all the time. I wear clothing that fits me, not small clothes. Lol
As a Mets fan I long for the days of John Franco. We have no closer. Ugh.
Happy Tuesday: Fashion fun, who was your favorite dress at this year's annual Costume Institute Gala ?
In Seattle i had a cab driver who explained the cost savings of flying to eastern europe for dental procedures.
it's raining again!! :D
Clock strikes 7:30 and my day is already flawless! Happy Mother's Day to my girls! I love you, guys!
Patience and timing lead to another day of successful trading. The ability to read the character of the market is key to strategy selection
you are making me laugh so hard right now in the library hahahaha
Brewery Vivant in Grand Rapids... an absolute gem of a Belgian beer bar.
I love Real Simple. I can't wait to get accepted with Pinterest so I can start compiling all their recipes :)
Fans come up to me at every show and say that I have their "dream job." I guess they are right. If they knew the work of photo processing.
are they my boyfriend -___- lol
Wow. Exactly what have the two of you got going on? Sounds suspicious, and, knowing Jamie, I'm precisely correct.
Really really hate flying southwest!
hey Jinxx! It's my birthday! :D
i like that!
“: Final day for the #keywestsongfest. , , and more close it out. See everyone next year” great time!Thx
RT : Wow! That is beautiful work , well played.
thanks for the love and support
Headed for Florida! Anybody know of any good bands playin' or attractions in between we would enjoy tonight!?
were u with those group of people when blake hopped out the car and started dancing haha
From CMR ~ CalSTRS 2012-13 results: Chair = Dana Dillon (Teacheer in Weed, CA) & Vice Chair = Harry Keiley (Santa Monica HS Teacher)
Not being told the whole truth
Pwning my iphone!
Kim McConnell NNJ-ASTD President is kicking off describing how session links to ASTD Competency Model
John elway about Tebow - if I wanted someone to marry my daughter, it's be him, but for a quarterback not so much
It's good to hear Jay Bilas sarcastically talk about the 2nd round."oh yeah, 60 teams get a bye" since that terminology is insisted by media
I consume a lot of high fructose corn syrup.
what it is homie!
Knowing the only thing ppl r gonna talk about this week is prom <<<<< :(
Done with 2 now 4 to go.
mattress surfing is definitely on the bucket list.
Thanks for the tweet Phil!
I cannot trust a man to control others who cannot control himself. - Robert E. Lee
Very nice page, Barry. You are obviously way ahead of me. Next step is adding 'pages' to my 'page. How? Who knows....?
As you go the way of life you will see a great chasm. Jump. It is not as wide as you think. Native American Proverb
Spring time in Tucson is the perfect time to take a night out on the town. Call today for a reservation for all of your transportation needs
Another day, another dollar.
I should probs do my 6283639 government definitions.. #thanks !!
Yes, now enjoy your Facebook wall.
To 'like' your own status, is like highfiving yourself in public.
Night First Day Of School 8th grader yay
My 3 year old son really liked Niki Minaj until she scared the crap out of him tonight.
Can't wait for Savage U goes to U of O. Hahaha. :)
can't wait to hear all about when I'm in NC next week
I love you. Real or not real? Real. <3
I am in chicago and my balls hurt. Thank god its not my balls.
Karma is a fucking bitch, and you deserved it.
iM HARD-HEADED DOE
Just looking to squeeze six out of Wolf
In. Spanish. Class. On. A. Friday.
Hangar One vodka tastings in Alameda..
Lord, my eyes are on YOU.
live twitter streaming isn't yet available on GeoCommons. perhaps we can set you up with a demo server
Before leaving for any place Justin chew gum #Bieberfacts I also do, is like a tradition hahaha ok not
Vega Communications loves working on fabulous Wordpress sites. Does your company have an optimized site?
the smell may cloak you... No one ever said the dead dont fart, they lack muscle control to clench....
Mothers keep our world afloat. Happy mothers day to all the lovely mothers in the world. <3
I've heard he's a pretty righteous dude!
what a dilemma #hashtag “: #I #love #to #hashtag”
That freaks me out cause this old man that lives near me drives an old police car. #creepy 😳😥
chipotle ranch, lettuce, tomato, patty, pep jack, jalepenos, patty, pep jack, bacon, fried egg. It was delicious!
This week is gonna be ridiculous
In the #RoaringTwenties after lynchings took place against blacks in Tulsa and Rosewood the largest race riots took place in America.
I wish daft punk were still alive. Then we wouldn't be in this mess.
In-person, for a specific amnt, after u have gotten to know the #donor, determined interest and researched.
ima follow u bcuz of ya tweets nt ya looks like the rest of these clowns
His head looks freakishly large in that photo. Wait, what?
Hope everyone had a nice Thanksgiving and enjoyed the long weekend. Now time to get the brain stimulated again...
I think some beliebers are selfish like the ones that make TT like #brazilwantsjustin bcs hasnt been in other states ever.
Fully moved out and ready to go through the pounds of crap I have. Best day ever
You were awesome comedy club Please follow me and I'm keeping and eye on where you will perform next I don't want to miss it!
I just recently set my Tweets to private again because I get all these strange people I don't know following me.
listening to justin biebers christmas album in may.. akws
Have yet to start #writing today as the entire morning's been spent putting out fires everywhere. Can't work in a burning office can I?
I absolutely loved the grad speech Alexis made!!!
tonight, proposed that we have a blt night in the near future! i agree, because blt has gotten soggy! :/
Andy Borowitz: Palin says that if one of the GOP candidates doesn't work out she could step in, which I guess would make her Shemp.
see..u need more American in you! Oops. Sounded dirty. Sorry. Lol
Awww!!! How sweet!!! XOXO I appreciate that Scott!
lol.okay.just checking.
Spend yesterday with 20 brilliant people. I'm so excited about what is being planned for later this year, but I can't tell you yet...
Woke up hungry & forgot my lunch at home -_-.
welcome to packnation! Greatest franchise and fans in history. Glad ur a part of it now!
That annoying moment when you cannot find the long side of your blanket.
Yes. I'm SO EXCITED!
There's no drug around like what I found in u
Mondays Specials: College Road Trip (Disney, Airing 8:00 Pm EST TIME) And is showing all of its Original movies today.
Israeli producer Sam Feuer will be talking his new movie The First Grader tonight 9-11pm(pst) on RADIOKOLAMERICA.COM
2 days from now I'll be in Seattle with Nick! Yay! 17 days w/no Nick is way too long.
Wow have fun! (: One of these years I'll go 😓
Deleted all #junk mail and responded to urgent emails. Determined not to #stress about my new routine for the next 10 weeks.
hope you recorded Cal and play it after the break.
it looked like freddy kruegers face but a dick
cool! When are you going to be in town?
What if cats began to take over the world?
So, without Prozac, I cry a lot more. Fancy that. I love SSRIs!
do you know when the soccer schedule will be available by any chance?
at the Turner House watching the Pack with Jodi and Jackie waiting for the GA lottery
Since I am at work, can someone please text me primary results as they come in???
mobile office hours are .. now?
Dude. Next time you are stick digging thru your change jar, you'll thank them! ;) haha
My dad had this philosophy that if you tell children they're beautiful and wonderful then they believe it, and they will be
I think he was laughing his ass off! But you can imagine it the other way. >:o| haha
I'm afraid that you'll never know how I really felt .
Certainly, the bell could be rung with a usinger's sausage. i'm a little worried about finding a musical-sounding meat, though
That's cool, but I think I'd wind up playing "guess the facet name" or just use it as simple search out of confusion.
I really need a thirstbuster to quench my thirst...
Owling will begin when arrives at
I'm for sure getting a hedgehog, but who is gonna take care of it when i deploy? : /
Broken Feet. We have cracked the code!
‎[Campus Bulletin] From the look of the cold, lifeless bodies shuffling across campus, Dead Week is in full swing.
Hahaha !! Get it Tatted RT:“: Pussy with a whistle.”
oh yea i was lol
ForRealz -_- RT If these ref's call one more bullshat call I'm.gonna slit my wrists.
Not being a Vikings fan
RT : A3 when it come to PR I always suggest (if you can) hire a PRO. Blogging agent can be OK, but PR PRO is a must
He told me they were coming at him this summer. He took a visit late September.
I LOVE YOU TOO!! <3
Hey !! Like Divine Blue ?! Check us out at twitter.com/divineblue and press that like button !! Dont forget that follow !!
i dunno about 5+gb downloads. Definitely enjoying bluray and blockbuster monthly pass
u left too early. Hilarity of Craziness @ Freedom. Poor
total! I'm wiped out!
Just woke up to no power.. uh oh
people get upset because they hate of bikes. Why don't ppl get upset at speeders, red light runners & cars that roll thru stops
Home Furnishings for mom, Free shipping on almost everything!
Toms? Get yourself some Tims! #1. is the man. #2. It's #sickestbrandever! Get yourself a pair. I know I am.
Looking forward to tonight's concert at 8pm in Paul Hall. We can't believe it's already the last concert of the semester!
Good news
Wasn't bashing Fox News at all!
Remember we are YOUR "connexion"
Keep ur circle small cause once the label comes callin.. everyone gon want something.. even the ones that just kik it and don't do any work!
decided to unfollow someone famous. he dissed Rush. very uncool...
my eye hurts too much
Funny thing of the day: Hearing an older, male professor say, "I always just call those 'hair pretties'" regarding ponytail holders.
Looking forward to Filming on Wednesday!
Florida Presidential Debate!
Hope that txplant shows up soon.
80's Night Every Wednesday at Amber!!
I've got a crush on you<3
Nina Simone's signature tune, "My Baby Just Cares for Me." Did you know it was written for the 1930 musical... fb.me/1fGDe8IqE
wta it do dont tell them i talk to u im stell on the shit list but jest wonted to say hi and
This is the longest February ever.
But mine does... RT : If ya mom dnt got twitter stop wishing her happy mothers day on here smh...
Part Four: Boys the forgotten victims (with video) - Vancouver Sun
Please text HOMES to 85944 to donate $10 towards building a home for severely injured veterans. Please RE-TWEET and spread the word!
RT everyone talking about DC being tied on points with #SportingKC remember DC has played THREE more games than
Follow my tweets! is a Awsome account related to Watch porn online!;)
College Football! Ohio State vs. University of Miami!
crazy well have a good day :)
tell me more about this chocolate cheese...i'm very interested.
Seriously! It is a great version of the Husy, especially for people with brown hair. I love it!
Staggering, for sure. Hopefully this helps parents realize how important sound mechanics are to their sons.
Just realized that Brew's twitter is actually Sorry for making you follow a random dude.
RT : "This is how life should be. All about happiness." - WE AGREE! #MobWives-yes agree!
why thank you :p
Remember people: don't illegally download movies. It makes George clooney sad. Like, I don't want bang my model gf in my infinity pool sad
I know I'm a grown man but I wish my childhood would have been better maybe I would have made better choices.
Oh, well still. lol
So scared for tomorrow #hurricane Irene will come to newyork city cause my dad just came back from bjs and got......
one man's reeking...
A big shout out to Donald Trump & Michael Cohen for overturning petty prejudices that get in the way of Peace and Harmony!
Wha?!? Going there tomorrow! :)
I found a purple shirt to wear. Sadly I am unable to take a post a pic in support. I am still in though. WEAR PURPLE TODAY TO SUPPORT!
Check out the CohesiveSelf iOS app by , a #swroc participant. is another #roc innovation.
no its not a myth yea i got a milf, real shit shes, 34....:)
sill on?
Last Computer Repair in #Pittsburgh, Installation of Windows Vista on Gateway T-Series Laptop....
Thanks! You rock, too!
if i get vip tomorrow holy fuck i swear i'll be the happiest girl alive. i'll cry of happiness
wish i could--headed to my sister's basement to do some cleaning
2012 Resolution #10: Recognize and overcome you own cognitive bias.
you got a twitter!!!
use this time to convince Ted to start tweeting ^_^
“: Buchman doesn't like purdue! Stel?” always find your true friends this time of the year. #wheresauburnhopes?
thank you for following. I remember applying there as an intern :)
We can't hang our heads in shame over a bad game. Let's put our chins up for a great season.
Feeling young again....counting M&M's in math class
some people dont have food to eat. and you are VOMITING UP FOOD THAT THEY COULD BE EATING. that is so ungrateful.
Thanks Janet!
I wish I heard from occasionally. Oh well... Lol
Remembering my great uncle who lost his battle with cancer 13 years ago today
To bed early with an upset tummy..bummer I wanted to do christmas decorations with my babies. :(
and Julie Andrews -- amazing!!
Good morning #ThankGOD for blessing us wit another day
Bank of America: Is &quot;Too Big To Fail&quot; A Failure?
Oh Coach Not Here Today :(
William's 'habitat' image in for Louisiana
It's not about being what everyone wants you to be, it's about being yourself and finding someone who truly loves you for what you are.
Just had some "relaxed young ladies" come in my store and one told her friend..."My edges are natural!" Lololol too cute!!!
My new friend here made fun of me for liking #RBD, so I continue to stand alone.
People at school.. :-/
Where've you been?
Congratulations to all my fellow graduates today! We made it:)
who let these hoes in my room
I feel your pain. Google Docs looks to me like they had a blind monkey design the interface.
My MOM just said she would do nasty things to . Wow mom TMI!!!
no lol day glow is my birthday weekend so that's my gift to myself :)
I miss you, too. We need a girls' night very soon. #catchup time
Haha, not quite yet...then again, we are a Twitter #newbie, so we'll see. Thanks for the follow!
Gloves are off. Round 1 of "Buffett Rule" debate: McConnell calls it a gimmick, says Obama more interested in misleading than leading.
My 4 year old son has Tetralogy of Fallot.
"it's not Mexican anymore"
make sure you hit the Drover!!! My favorite place when I'm in Omaha. Best glazed carrot in town.
I'm still embarrassed isabel told Trent
Unbelievable.... tries to act as if it is a matter of opinion whether or not she took a vote
oh stop...what time does it end?
Even though I'm driving to st. Louis anyway. Lol
RAIN RAIN GO AWAY !
FOX tomorrow.
The Banking system is being prop up by the current administration. We need a public works program that has Blacks fully involved!
Poetry's fixation on the expressive self always makes me think of an alt world in which all art wld have to justify itself as portraiture.
Wishing you all a fabulous holiday weekend. XOXOXOXOXO
It took me a while before I figured out why the words to the Exsultet were so strange. As if that thing weren't hard enough.
I love people who tell a long story and then end it with, "So, long story short..."
The wind is just too much this morning
no but I was talking to some girl yesterday saying she knows sme ppl tht can help is with setting up a dance and stuff lke tht
Soccer Game Today. Lets get another win 😜
DANA....LOVE YA, BUT.....STICK TO PARTY PLANNING......
RT : Just attended a great Career Fair success workshop at the CMS, I highly recommend!
Collection building to curation to production to publishing within one place.
you aren't lying bro! I just got a $90 shirt for $35.
Good #Crossfit sesh this morning.. had a little anxiety over box jumps, LOL
he was being filmed for something, and now I don't see him (intermission) but I will keep an eye out!
Workin on chasing & down...
my lips are sealed, lol
Anybody got a good sports rehab spot inside the loop? My back is fuuuucked
Time to drink coffee with Pastor Furtick. You can too... Elevationchurch.org
Really with this iphone update right now?!? can't wait to have absolutely nothing saved in my phone bc i'm a retard.
He Is Risen! The Lord Is Risen Indeed!
Hope you enjoy that $1 meal!
don't worry you'll find one.. i'll help u XD!
had a great time at the quince tonight :)
Time to be productive and get to packing up more of my apartment.
Just believe in me...
Thanks for the re-tweet! Hope others find Seth's info as valuable as I have in my on-line journey.
like "I am a legitimate palm reader...if you'd like I would read your palm for a free tan"
I am guessing better then the real thing!
Having lots of fun learning RedBeanPHP (3.1). I am just starting to get through the ORM bits.
Joey from friends is the sexiest man ever.
Listen in tonight at www.WZZO.com for - If you live in the PA Lehigh Valley area, tune into 95.1-FM
Yes IM GREAT! Todays my birthday!
my pleasure.
yes SIR! Hey, so glad you have trained the great Texas Golfers!
It's a Periphery kinda night. Listening to the album right through.
My attitude is based on your actions.
I dunno😁☺ RT : Why is so purrrrrttyyyyy??
Out with the old, in with the new.
if the nerd population is segmented, yes. Most people respond to emotional reasoning not date
Working side jobs on both my days off. Tired. Counting my blessings that I'm doing this to pay 4 vacation, not just to get by.
1234 i really like your username. you're a good fan and i love your tweets!
time for eggnog and last minute shopping. love it!
ur ao sexy u know what and I'm do my little dance on the cat wal
Perfect!RT : Tomorrow is National Wear Red Day! Support Go Red for Women movement and help wipe out women's #1 killer,heart disease!
At cheddars!!! Yeah!!! Love my new iPhone 4!!!!
I can't cognitively function and listen to Bach simultaneously :-)
hahah! :) i love you.
- I was at the publicity dinner for , the show I've just been cast in. We open on the 23rd of Feb. STOKED!
And these scars are still shown. When will they heal?
If it keeps raining lift ur thoughts above the clouds. The sun is just hidden. Success is as well it is just covered by cloudy thinking
short weekend, need more rest.
Listserv descends into argument over the term "Bro-Choice." Someone complains about argument. New argument about said complaint ensues.
based on their newfound physiques they might work out together too
thx v much. which story did you get from me? Couldn't find it. Thx
ik u wudnt do tht to me lol. n wow i started cryin too when i seen paul cryin
*whispering* hey guess what? You get to see me tomorrow night!
Too much
The media is boxing MITT ROMNEY into a corner. The BULLY debut from his old school really shows who MITT is. Granted people do change.
Gardner Shirt - Check...Planned escape from work to be home in time for the game - Check! Let's Go Yankees! Happy Opening Day!
Going to bed knowing I'm safe, happy and knowing everything will be okay. What else could i ask for? 💙
Shout Out 2 all of TeamLilKim & TeamJanetJackson!! We taking over twitter!! It's Wake-n-Bake time!!
“: Man if pole dancing is art, you know how many fuckin artists I know ...” 0???
kevin harvick :) he look so calm so he is deff ready to go racing and he going win the daytona 500!!
on my way!
I don't know about "owning" but at least I didn't trip!
Who is the poor kid that has to clean up that guy's testicle?
if dirk hits that three with under a minute left , serious dagger ... But he missed !
getting into Catherine the Great: Portrait of a Woman by Robert J. Massie - good narrative bio
havent been on in a while wassup twitter
not that you dm me with the egg baby girl -_-
Landed safely in Chicago.... Next stop airport #2 Miami! But first an hour and a half layover... :-(
CCH Historical Society meets Sunday in Calhoun
If ya feet nasty ya box has to be
Baby can i get a refill ?
My gynecologist thinks I'm a dude.
Thank you, sir!
RT : Starting off my #FF with friends
Meaning the writers, not the politicians, don't make much $, right?
Oh yeah Chargers football is back. Superbowl bound baby.
What a great night at Sheffields! Thanks to RUI and our readers for a fun night. See you all at Story Week soon!
radio edit/street version/instrumental/acapella as well as his bio/publicity photo. check your aol inbox
Spending fathers day with my daugther!
Cat: Watch me eat. Me: I have work. Cat: Watch. Me: What do you think buys that food? Cat: *nom* Me: Your belly shows this isn't a problem.
TY for shout out
sure has been a lot of drama in the mayor's seat! RT : I just ousted Suren D. as the mayor of Pepino's Mexican Grill
Probably not going to live tweet the school carnival. Just saying.
#ThatAwkwardMoment the trashy couple by you at the drive-in get in the backseat & sink down while staring at you. 😳
this #starbucks coffee tastes like watered down anal leakage. fuck this bullshit
The reason can hold his notes for so long is because he takes in oxygen through his beard.
the gentlemen were scholarly and the ladies were effervescent. Some boys smelled bad but we can over look the details. Welcome!
much agreed with the lowlights.
Anyone else notice when Ben awkwardly doesn't know what to say/do he goes in for the kiss?
because I think it is relevant...
U really do have to watch who u have kids wit. So many people r immature n will try n keep ur kid from u
It's nice to log onto iTunes & see that Van Halen has a new CD. Even better that there's no "explicit", "clean" choice. "Tattoo! Tattoo!"
In my room being lonely, listening to 1D, and petting my doggy wubz!:)
congrats on the #startup, Carlos
Yes, it's 2012 and I'm still listening to the Jonas Brothers.
At the community center..
thanks steve! email me at for free promo codes!
this is bogous!
So glad you enjoyed, it !
sorry for that night! EMBARRASSED! lol
But thanks <=}
I got the same underwear :)
When electricity is out, #SocialMedia not just go-to for info; is a public forum for instant problem solving & dialogue
Matt Kemp comes out of the game in the 4th. Looks like he pulled up slow running to 1st, was playing with an iffy hamstring
How are you, maybe follow me back?(: #You'rCute&'HaveAGoodVoice<3
You can make a huge impact in someones life today! Maybe, it would be by partnering with us.
Have a happy Easter!
Hungover doesnt even describe how i feel :/
#nowplaying The Perfect Fan - , perfect way to celebrate this day =)
« Where is when i need a laugh follow her #teamfollowback»
YES PLEASE. We can wear our pink tights.
very weird my bearded friend but it's ok I still win every time
When in need of laughter just turn on your tv and watch #jerryspringer the most out of control show I have ever watched
That's what I love about you guys. Once a Loguer, always a Loguer. Thank you, Joe!
I want my photography to actually go somewhere >.<
Surprisingly , i have time to tweet .
really? Since the stimulus began to kick in n 2010 job loss was reversed..and would be better if not for the stupid fiscal BS
i dont see you at all ):
Wind scares meh
All I Hv 2 Say Is 5.99 ... We always running up on sum, never fails.lol.
drug testing is only to receive cash benefits through TANF, they could still receive Medicaid though.
SO jealous of you! haha
7 Daniel Sims Sites
I pray it's a productive morning!!!;)
Textually Transmitted Diseases cannot be cured! Use protection!
Our #BeatTheStreak picks are: Holliday (STL), Cabrera (DET), Choo (CLE), and Martin of the #Yankees! Who did you pick for today?
did you take Japanese there?
I sent that tweet b/4 I was done (I do that a lot)! Have a gr8t trip - looking forward to your tweets. The bit.ly made me laugh...
There's nothing good on tv
NEW SINGLE "Life & Favor" by my friend, Pastor John P Kee available for download at iTunes now!
I need u to follow these peps Get ur networking weight up
The ultimate measure of man is not where he stands in times of comfort, but where he stands @ times of challenge & controversy. ML King Jr.
ohmygosh, I can't wait for #SaySomethin to be up on iTunes. It's an amazing song your voice is perfect.<3
Grammy's are on February 12th. Jazz is announced in the early afternoon. If there's crazy news- you'll hear me holler back in NYC.
cause my mommy told me aint have to go if ian want to .
Push/Pull Hardware System suits healthcare environments.
Hail! RT : Congrats welcome to DC!
cher lloyd is so cute aw
Attention all of Comic Vine: my secret project will be revealed tommorow! the wait is over!
Every women deserves a man who looks at her every day like it's the first time he saw her.
“: "People ignore design that ignores people." — Frank Chimero” impersonal design rustles my jimmies more than about anything!
no, jjp the svp and amazing producer..
Virginia has seceded. Heaven help us.
What did you get me? A new hookah?
well ACTUALLY in '43 i marched with harriet tubman
yes, i saw this yesterday!!! only it was on my phone and only saw the title...thnks for reminding me! bullshit, indeed!
thanks for the tweet! i can't imagine staying anywhere else while in Montreal! see you next month!
Don't run away from the truth because I'm not giving up on you
Paint on your Ceramic Dinner Plates- Ceramic Painting Project - Art and Craft
Check out our friends at www.mirrormascots.com
Wow son ran over his father and killed him
Ooh I got to use the Effin bathroom
I'd think that was cute if I hadn't been trying for an hour to get in to have reset errors :P
This is so cute!!!!! I have to start reading history, too!!!!
B_TCH EVERYONE IS GOING TO KNOW UR LAST NAME
Awww Mitch Lucker I love your hair! It's adorable(: it looks very nice <3 :]
Mayor Soglin says, " We are going to win."
You don't become happy by pursuing happiness. You become happy by living a life that means something.
(Abraham Lincoln) You will never find time for anything. If you want time, you must make it.
I love The Fray, but what the hell is this?
Girls=(time)(money). Time=Money. therefore Girls=(money)(money)=money². Since money = √(all Evil). Then Girls=(√evil)²
Then i shall kill you in your sleep
dont blame me..i said Boise St. SHOULD have been included....but they wont be...maybe now in the Big East tho
Massive TiVo fail (the killing s2e01)
thanks for your forebearance! May I get the cue sheet for the Ansley "Go West" route?
are you saying I am not good enough for Wye Oak?
"where im from the dope boyz is the rock starzz but they cant cop cars without seeing cop cars"
Last day of St. Henry tomorrow.
Scott and Allison :(
It should be! Are you still wanting to try and figure out a hotel out? I'm driving down this year so I'll have a car.
So, how was CC?
You need to come to #Columbus!
Cassidy, thanks so much. Let me know when a good time is. All my best, Matthew
"In another world, another life I'd still belong to you" </3 ... Cheryl cole<3
Surfing Niall- Louis, how long do you think till their batteries die out? Louis- I dont know... I just wish you were Harry :(
.im FInally doing Laundry ..
Wha - wha! The oil spill has been plugged and the financial regulation bill passed! Can it all be true?!?!
Texting Joy... 
and I won't be home for good until January 2013 and as we all know the world will have ended by then
Hey!! Thanks for checking it out. You dig it?
So, Rich told me to STFU earlier, and I'm a little hurt by that -__-
#Titanic 2?!?! Cool for all the folks that can afford more than third class steerage. U can find me down below doing the jig. :)
Yep that was a snake
Florida paralegals - don't forget about recent amendments to rule 1.720 - impress your boss and remind him/her to file the cert of authority
will do all that I can
So sorry for you're & Larry's loss. I'm a old friend of Larry's from HS. Prayers for your family. <><
I'm proud of you!
Keep my friend lovely in prayer her family is Jehovah's witness & she got kicked out her house today for following Christ
Lebron thrives in MSG!!
I don't understand >.<
Happy Mothers day to my beautiful best friend :) Angel has been blessed with a great mommy!
If you come to Taberna del Alabardero and check-in Yelp's mobile app, we offer 20% discount on paella of Chorizo, ribs and fried egg!
Acxiom's Colclasure emphasizes the emotional attachment to personal data
- We'd love to co-host a #furchat and discuss the "Digital Dog Park" - how do you send and receive info with your dog peeps online?
I just got really excited! They are so perfect!
I'll be there with orange bells on :) probably arriving Friday
SUPER procrastinating on this paper
Haha cops rolled up!
Double espresso 2 go!... Ok, & a brownie :/
you never fail to amaze me!! :)
It's a go for Tacos A Go Go tonight at Beef, chicken, and veggie options. You don't realize how happy tacos make me. :-D
who's on the kiss cam?
#SignsYouLostAFight If You Come Back With No Arms
DO U KNOW
lol ahaha na I think I ma get an iphone
#sslive knowledge workers typically prefer a high level of autonomy in their jobs
yep that would work.
Sleepy, Hungry & Tired
I love you, perfect girl. You better be bringing me a box of diamonds 💎😍💎
Have a lovely morning and a loved filled day!
far as safeties go tho kinda big drop off in talent after Mark Barron and Harrison Smith
if you're thinking about renting Like Crazy from #redbox..... DON'T.
No, it's because people don't realize they can't program
People will forget what you said. They will forget what you did. But they will never forget how you made them feel. - Thanks
it my birthday can i get from you both and get a win for me have a great day and be safe
i really like makeup forver hd foundation. I have several mac formulas too.. it all depends on what you want out of it.
#Moebius'spoetrychallengeMotherfuckers I told her," I love you, but until you put a ring on my finger... we're just fucking." Hope or less
Happy Easter Monday!
hahahaha denva shemnva... we are going to dominate Gold Club and cannot wait
gosh i have work @ that time ! :(
And thank you so, so much for posting this. I'll be using it in class today.
Heading to Vegas. Would rather be playing legos and kitchen with the kids.
This is gonna be a great week.
Sneads has never had much luck against Bozeman.
Don't miss DJ Kidd, Joey G, and guest bartender Ryan Healy tonight at Sutra Lounge for Sindustry Wednesdays!
Both in a two day span!
Funnier to see become obese: Mick Jagger or Michelle Obama?
there's espresso grounds in my americano. times like this i want to go back to starbucks & take back my tip.
wasn't talking to you, quit smoking so much and you wont be so paranoid
slowly realizing I read way too many blogs. It's a sickness
Wow! You are really pretty💜 &You have an amazing voice!
nope everyone is laime!!!! I know where Belgium is I'm a history teacher lol
Why's it take forever to do homework, but time goes by so fast when you're on the Internet? Shoot, man.
can't i please just find a nigga who aint w/no drama ...
Singing is so much harder on a Sunday morning when one loses that extra hour! Happy the evenings will be lighter now though :)
I could see niall and the potatoes. Lol :-)
yay! Where are you off to?
RT Wat up ««on the way to work wussup
One who starts earlier, may become number one.
Innings like this are what happens when you face a lineup that takes pitches. #WhiteSox have far too few of those types of players.
“: New revenue numbers suggest positive economic growth for Wisconsin! We need to continue to move forward.” Divide & Conquer?
Q: from If u do iPad pilot w/ur users, what do u try 2 find out most from pilot? What's the next phase in mind?
Welcome new followers!
Getting excited about the Children's Hospital Battle of the bands at the Hard Rock Boston tonight
Good morning! I'm at Broadway Comedy Club tonight 9:30PM
Good morning Louisville! Who's ready for some basketball!!???
Success is not only a fact that happens to others,it's something that definitely can happen to you.
Dominated Mission Trails Regional Park today. Thank you summer in October!!
Where u from u seem cool as a fan
Any plans on releasing the soundtrack? It would be an amazing listen!
local chicagoan 's apparel in his avi makes me sick.
#CantWait,come on 8am! Ill be in North #Miami on set filming a #wrestling based commercial! Money Money #Money!
Man I miss playing football. Shouldn't have ever gave up that dream.
I know, it finally had to happen! On my way to dinner, no less, with who is way more of a sport about it than I was.
KNEW IT. He just does so much stupid ish people starting calling him a troll lmao
I suspected that was the problem but didn't want to admit it. He seems very happy still.
On way to HiHo Lounge for some BBQ & Mardi Gras Indian show. Gotta get home early. Gotta go 2 noon meeting. Rollin with it. Dustin it off
Having your heart broken just means your human and it makes your heart strong.
Too young to know, not old enough to care.
a close second...
Yay! It's being delivered or you're shopping?
Congrats on making it to regional finals.
taking a trip to the nasty natti.
Lets party rock this Sat Flip cup tourney starts at 2pm! .com to enter!
Hey Hey Ana, Does Mariah Carey have a star? If not, will she be getting one anytime soon?
You're welcome. Thank you...I'm trying to stay cool too. :) Temperature is going back up.
when are we gunna chill?
haha. I wish I could give away iPads…but no.
je suis horrible at french pronunciation
all the guys I have dated have been my height or slightly taller.
Dude wow, I did not even realize that game took place at Walter Brown. Amazing how life plays out.
#resume #tips A good place to find work is on LinkedIn.com. Make sure your profile has a picture up.
damn i feel so bad i didnt get to see u but i snt u my # in a msg txt me whenever
Follow us on twitter, then come in today for brunch and receive a friends & family discount!!!
next time we will all go grab sum food and drinks!!
So much Iowa State Pride right now
TONIGHT at Current sushi DJ DIRTYHANDS! RSVP at
Finally going to see avengers tonight. ^.^
The fridge is full of stuff, I want nothin in there... Why is life so hard sometimes?
yes, yes I will! BEST GRAPHIC EVER!!
I did & I am SO EXCITED. I'm also keeping my house in Butler so I can see just how thin I can spread myself without disintegrating.
"Keep calm and carry on." - a poster but one that Churchill promoted during the war and I think is especially relevant for a startup
hen i die in black ops i scream "holy waka flocka!" lol.
I just requested to join the group - sounds great! Can't wait to read the thread.
Everest junkie? Check out With Eric West on facebook or on twitter for daily facts about Everest/8000m peaks
bummer dude but CA sounds pretty good.
&& when I'm gone is going to be too late for you to realize what you had ;)
Ground Shaking in Kansas...
For a successful technology, reality must take precedence over public relations, for Nature cannot be fooled. ~ Richard Feynman
Used to be a shocker... Now it's just expected with a runner at 3rd
yo man? Does barbosa still play up there?
I would rather be ignored than deliberately seek attention.
Agreed! They couldn't have read their own catalogs and contracts before suing?
140 MILLION TWEETS (X 25 WORDS). Now what do we do? Make children read long paragraphs (in textbooks). Should we care? Change your thinking.
20% off grooming in May, includes facials, pawdicures, creative grooms, stencil designs & much more!
#iNeedThat an extreme relationship makeover.
wut time should we leave from six flags?
I listen to your show on the way home from work every day! Funny as hell! Keep it up man!
There are few things better than a Whataburger on Texas toast.
Wow, I can't believe Peyton is off to Denver!
You must answer trivia question posted @ 4pm EST in the official twitter handle of athlete (answer) & follow that athlete &
RT : Awareness of our mortality makes every moment precious so the purpose of life can become the expansion of happiness.
Forgot my cell at home. FYI. The GMAT guy isn't here...if he doesn't show, I'm home after 11. *fingers crossed*
Holy mother of God. Juliette Simms just killed that!!!!!! #TheVoice and umm Xtina, WE KNOW YOU'RE SICK.
Your beautiful when you smile , laugh , and is fun to be around.
Days flying by.....
also very little dialogue. One note: the nom'd films are accompanied by 4 others. I've only seen one of those.
This was the best day except for my car being wrecked I will let the attorney handle all of that. I'm so pround of my Pamela she gave
Getting ready for the operations meeting. We in the home stretch....
“Enthusiasm is excitement with inspiration, motivation, and a pinch of creativity.”
Man I hate lame niggers
woo I'm famous haha
Absolutely! You know I'll be thurr.
Thanks Brian! The Friday Fish Fry Guide is what was always needed but didn't exist until now.
get off the playground Bob, go back to work.
idk its all over ur backround not 2 b a creeper but I dnt think ur obssesed its nit like u have a cheeta shirt
It's doc style film in the same vein as Cloverfield and The Blair Witch project about the existence of Trolls in Norway.
I made my donation to tonight... I give my time and my cash... What about you?
:( well single we are so gym is what we do right? I went yesterday.
When the Brewers win the NL Pennet, how many other teams have won both the NL and AL Pennets.
Funny how a secular nation can base functionality on religious grounds...
omg i love you so much youre amazing and this is definetily not emily woooohooooo<333
I love Anna :)
He said if he could get me to be his girl, he so would... #imbeingmean #hessocute ahahahaha
you're welcome. Hope to see you in Charlotte for the DNC.
Big Data may be hot, but little data is what matters
Empire State Building congratulated One World Trade for becoming the tallest NYC building -under her breath she said, "Size doesn't matter."
lOl! Gone make it a mission.
"Never apologise, never explain". The Queen Mother.
So what is this now? #NewNewNewTwitter?
#nw - Pimp, Preacher, Profiteer
sadly yes. And then some (I didn't mention). :) checking them all out. Hey - it's free #storage!
That School Is Expensive As Fuck . I Wish We Had The Money -.-
Evidence that the Civil Wars did great on the #grammys - their website is down due to capacity issues.
you about to lol
Everything iss..soo....perfectly...sliced....:D *orgasm*
Calling it now. will prevail as the winner of #TheVoice Season 2. Got get em girl!
ok that's awesome
Absolutely. Would love to. What time?
Check out www.appointmentlink.com and tell us what you think!
Beijing, Hong Kong, Singapore, Jakarta - only half way done. Can't wait for Friday in Coronado!
Reading the script of Pulp Fiction. HILARIOUS!!!
Thank GOD that was a dream. Every woken up like that? I just did.
Soaked by the rain. Great day for report cards to come out halfway across the world in a portable.
Thanks! We can't take credit though. That is all Interface Journal's work. We're just highlighting it.
Woke up in a panic, man.
Chillen at the airport, already missing the beach and Miami :(
The hardest thing to do is watch the one you love, love someone else.- Anonymous
Cards are Back on track
hey beautiful :-)
The #timelapse installation is 2 hrs of gorgeous Seattle-centric visuals...1hr to loop in day, and 1hr to loop at night.
Incredible things come from incredible dreams- InSpotter mobile app
I'm sitting here cracking up! And I'll find you ... In your office!
Robert Pattinson buys Kristen gold locket
Ph dang then I can't I have church tomorrow /:
Safe travels to everyone heading up to Sydney for PMA! A lot of flights are canceled here in Melbourne. #roadtrip!!
Four reasons why a girl might stop texting you 1.you got boring 2.she fell asleep 3.she found someone else 4.you started responding with "K"
girl I miss you I graduate Sunday at MSU you need to be there
Asdfghjkl. Horrible day.
good to have u there RT : #vol2012 - learning about health care from Chicago Obama HQ -
did u see it??
I want to be the girl that you give your to jacket to when it's cold, the one that you tell your friends "That's my girl." <3
Needs to get busy on Twitter!
Just finished w/group of MS students in OH. One girl is writing songs and formed a band to get the word out about Belonging. She's a Hero.
I completely agree. "Discovery" I think diminishes the overall value.
Fi/T (G) = M Focused intensity over time multiplied by God equals unstoppable momentum - Dave Ramsey
Unfortunately some do ": Do "Dear John" letters come in the form of a text??"
NMPhilharmonic thanks for following The Hilltop on Twitter!
RT : If you work in sports, follow and support SPORTS TACKLES CANCER as our industry comes together to help:
didn't see the original tweet.. but i know i already agree. I'm not a fan of any IE broswer
of course! ;)
bone thugs n harmony tonight .. some tickets are still available get em while they're hot
well now u did babe lol
Seeing that fuck head Joe Brian on my TL 😒 <
Love that post! And loved sharing it a few weeks ago in our #twitter chat!
congrats on the baptism...and the Dodgers are 3-0, great day!
Well uhh yeah
So gone already with and 😂😂😂
I swear, everybody has. I know I have!
happy to contribute some culture to the twittersphere!
just in general to spend due to the US money conversion rates, how expensive is it? cant be worse than Manhattan ol
hell yeah snoopaloop!
I want to thank Naomi for her patience in assisting me today. I am now better educated in how to use Twitter. Thanks!!
it's a great time to try something new to revitalize your lifestyle. Playing good rock drums for instance.
Waiting for former exchange student coffee with the President in Seoul.
i discovered the world of leggings and tunics!
#Starbucks Opens 1st Juice Bar Today - 'Evolution Fresh' near Seattle.
Headed to Madison to see Herbie Hancock!
thanks brah I appreciate that real talk
" Life Goes On & Get Some Heavy "
when that third person shows up to a co-write, and that person's invisible... goosebumps start sproutin'
saw 5 year engagement really loved it and you! You're cookie monster, elmo fight scene with Emily blunt was genius.
My business would be better if I could just market better.
Finally a beautiful day on my day off !!! :)
Marauders have a third period rally in them like we've seen? 27-11 CBA in shots third period is now underway. CBA in Front still 3-1.
my eyeliner broke...fml
C-Suite execs are shifting to a non-text web - 54% of executives share online videos with colleagues at least weekly
I'm good how's NYC??
I guess so... I'm confused about the whole thing, if I'm being honest.
I said you wanted the old nick back and he wants to be that guy again so go back out with him and be happy . .
As often as you are there I am surprised they don't have a Collette Burger...
great points/analysis; thanks! Hope the Grant & Co are doing well
done hun xo :)
woow the things i do for you! your welcome haha cant believe your too lazy to set ur own twitter account up!!!!!(;
Wearing my Zetterberg jersey and lo and behold he scores!!!!
It seems we have a VERY active baby.
I think you probably could have. Hope this helps.
#LAriots The South Central Los Angeles riot/rebellion began twenty years ago today
Yep! We are having a show at Area 702 Skatepark on March 10th and another one in the making. :)
Only made half of my 1000-word goal today. Better than nothing.
someone come redhill with me tmrw?
It's not like you care .
Okay, got a nice list. Give me a day or so, it's Oscar time! Thanks everyone.
Not everyone can be a "Barbie"....some ppl should identify themselves as "Rag Dolls"!! #Random thought
The Macon Telegraph, Ga., Ed Grisamore column - Chicago Tribune
What are some simple steps you take each day to support your local Economy? Let's start the conversation today!
we loved The Best Exotic Marigold Hotel
I can't follow anyone. When is this twitter bug going to be fixed?!
yeah, B1G gonna b about OhioState & UM again. with Buckeyes being stronger. Urban has that passion again. he is home.
Will the Governator become the king of illegitimate kids? Has Shawn Kemp been officially dethroned? (props to show horse Travis Henry)
#YoMommaSoFat she bleeds cooking oil.
I'm still waiting for the clouds to part open to the swinging fist of an omniscient music nerd.
Eminem Flow ~
Ohh yay - love her! I will be hosting #SNL on feb 11th with musical guest ! I am so excited!
Paul Pierce again showing he has no class.
Gettin that Pacific Northwest sunshine!
Please teach me gently how to breathe
#SXsacrificing lunch for this #LeanStartup session
It is getting really weird on glitchfm the stinky cheese incident cheese photoshoot 2?
#Disney is closing #SnowWhites Scary Adventure June 1st. They're making way for shops, restaurants, and an indoor
I really don't want to go to school -_-.
People's decisions these days are terrible -.-
Kobe dapped up JT after that 3 on the wing last night :hat
meeetting went well
Kobe's damn near bald
RT Genuine poetry can communicate before it is understood. T. S. ELIOT
. is the center of the sports world. & -all going super deep in the playoffs. Fun to watch!
Preparing to welcome all faculty and staff back to campus tomorrow...where did summer go?
Changes in Latitude - Casual Living
Been saying this 4 a long time: "KFI must permanently remove John and Ken from the air. Los Angeles deserves better."
Thanks so much! If we don't do it, who will, right?
#wesmackdown pitiful effort by PDX. Photoshop is so passe. Anyone can do that...(but videos, that's a totally different genre!)
You can read my blog @ www.mrdspainting.com this month we're focusing on Acoustic ceilings. Call us for a free esitmate and consultation.
It's too beautiful outside to be stuck in a cube! Need a bike ride stat!
Ogando is usually automatic, this is unusual.
RT : "Life is worth Living only if there are Goals Inspiring one to Live" [Friedrich Nietzsche]
Three years ago today, I spilled coffee on myself & then showed up for my first day at
“Prayer is not asking for what you think you want, but asking to be changed in ways you can't imagine.” Kathleen Norris
Yes, you are right. I love ball screen offenses. Pure motion tough for kids to learn.
Materialism: buying things we don't need with money we don't have to impress people that don't matter.
I get too lazy to message back people on FB, text, and tweet.
um there's some kind of marathon happening right outside our hotel. WTF it's not even 0730!
I dnt no wat to cook today #Ugh!!
After a couple times I know what to expect.
Hola. Yes, I'm a singer/rapper
Faiths getting weird apps #weirdo :P
T2: Started bc I love to write, but I soon realized exactly WHAT it was I needed to be blogging about -
You gonna like the way You Travel ! --- We Guarantee it ! www.FreeXpedia.com Discount Travel & more.
Lord, if I can't be skinny, please let all my friends be fat.
school is alright how about you? :)
When It Comes To Impact The #Eyes Have It! & Nothing Enhances The Impact of the Eyes Like #Color!
I woke up confused. Thought I had a final today then remembered its tomorrow.
I can't believe I'm looking at the Falcons? 21-0 lead in the first quarter?
Patron needed help getting online.
At least two jurors appear to be crying alongside Traci Lopez as she testifies about the wreck caused by Julie Ann Bronson & it's aftermath.
Love her! RT : Julie Bowen is hilarious... "I wear Spanx to bed."
Just $15 gets you in, free recovery drink, and a chance to WIN some amazing stuff!!!!! BE AT BOOT CAMP THIS SATURDAY!
Hope u joined Mr.Thunder&others 4 da 10th annual walk starting :00 PM on 96th & Amsterdam in Nyc.Shut down ur PR celbs&do something useful
But he is an "internet expert," Steve. He sells books and stuff. He must know more than you...
ANYBODY READ PART 36???:D
oh shit -_- i didn't know my honor diploma test was for today. im late & i hate going to test late.
; i want your #1000thTweet (:
N I'm sleepy
cuddles a hot bath snuggling some candles <3 please and thankyou?
Now he's just gotta learn that whole "journalism" thing and he's made RT This guy knows his #Coyote hockey -->
Hm. I will put feelers out!
right! Wow! Props.
People in #DC talk crazy to the employees in subway
Late start>
Peggy megan joanie are like the #bondgirls of
Someone need to follow me. Its freaking me out to have 666 followers for this long!
Irritated early already
We will have to make up an occasion to excuse the calories and sugar.
I just tried to "CTRL V" on my mobile device. This has brought me to a whole new level of professional I would say.
Looking work with real estate agent from all over the world. Please call me or visit my website www.kinworth.com
Any juicy Houswives stories in the book?!?! Congrats
I love you ♡
Pool is almost done!
my pleasure. You soon ok?
2 days until the enterprise mobility seminar at Technology Executives Club Chicago, come out & meet the Xorbix team
Ugh, not a fan of OKC ... and definitely not a fan of the Lakers. Wish both teams could lose.
Thank you! I'll let you know how it goes.
Please let this class end already..
i did not win the battle with git merge, but have temporary solution. will revisit next week when not in danger of throwing the computer.
In every facet of the business environment there is strength in numbers...I will succeed financially with each purchase YOU make.
My stuff came in from #merchNOW thanks!! So stoked
where are you? In heaven? Lol
because of the #Pirates recent woes the #Brewers game got the C team from Fox
I've been writing in the hero's pov all day. Ready to grow hair on my chest.
Starting Fransisco Liriano in your fantasy line up is like playing Russian roulette with every chamber loaded.
wat!?!?! Wait I forgot I recorded it wat performis was it after???? Lol
Wasteland.../still/ one of my favorite games. Ever.
Hey Wordpress friends - best photo album plug in?
Chooch knocks in another run and it's 5-1 going to the bot. of the 5th.
oh you saved my number I see?? Haha
he was the only guy hustling there. Everyone else was asleep
THANKS SO MUCH! #FOLLOWTHEBUGGY!! “: . LOVE the logo! Can't wait until you hit thestrEATS!”
About to watch Derby Baby Crazy crowd here.
MINE PLEASE
especially if the teacher read it aloud!
I should add painful hemorhoidal itch and the heartbreak of psoriasis to that list.
On Friday my beard turns 6 months old & frankly I'm really excited to shear it off. Its been a very interesting experiment!
I'm not so much a Gunners fan as I am a ManU hater.
✰ #OnlineBusiness Tip: Create a tagline or slogan that is catchy and describes your business.
climate control inside of trailer sitting in 100 degrees, sun, and smoke = unsuccessful
Last month, TPS submitted articles for clients on topics ranging from the basics of color to disaster recovery.
I now have something to look forward to on Wednesdays= WANTED WEDNESDAY, thanx for making my Wednesdays Awsome!!
Of all lessons my mom has taught me, how2love what u dont understand is most important, she may not get me but I never doubt she loves me
Ending the night with the NBA playoffs.
that's for sho
happy birthday I hope you have an amazing day you truly deserve it for all the hard work you've done #HappyBirthdayKidrauhl <3
Girl Bye w| ya Novella lookin ass !
Downloaded Songify last night. Too fun. This could be dangerous. Thanks!
100 degrees? Swing by Costco at 222 Martin Luther King from 10-2 for a cheesesteak & Italian ice - cool.
Free Pinkberry samples at Old.New.Blue!
I know I miss you too. And yes. My phone has been dead and I have been too lazy to plug it up. Are you going camping?
When i was little , 'imma tell your dad' was the scariest thing ever.
wtf are you saying, go back in the kitchen bitch where you belong LOL
YES Clair! RT > : "about to debut my dj set" yeah I bet you are...press play and pretend to queue up for an hour.
Which game you going to? I work the FS South games Sunday through Thursday. Let me know when you'll be there!
So far the best part about this game. The previews for 'The Dictator'. #Superbowl ...........nevermind
I'm only gonna be in Vegas for 3 days, but I packed for 10.
watching my favorite girl from the 60644 on style by June
Hey LeBron and Wade give it to Mario thanks...
Interesting story on - report says Mercedes convertible, Toyota Solaris, Scion TC & Hummer most ticketed vehicles.
#SammyHagar restaurant to open in Roseville. Cool!
good morning! :) guess who woke up at 7:30 am to clean so she could go out later? this girl did! :)
Crowded elevators smell different to midgets.
Im tryin to bro I been stuck in the studio lately I just left the studio this morning........you got somethin goin on down there
Call pitches her way out of the inning, but North Texas leads Florida Atlantic 1-0 after four innings.
I just adopted a furry dude cat and named him Hitchens.
I was telling a 20yr old about how much i liked New York Undercover...of course she had no idea what I was talkin about.
I was just yelling.. er, telling Riley how it would only have cost us 16 mil this year to keep Zack & add Gio.
Denver? Where is that? Like I give a shit!
Need another excuse to visit? RT : Randall will be our sommelier tonight, showing off our new vins de terroir wine list!
#GreenTeam pick that shit up, unite
Get Naked !
good luck tonight bro!
Monday Mantra: "Dreams are necessary to life. " ~ Anais Nin
The biggest challenge in life is to be yourself in a world that is trying to make you like everyone else.
so i can help i guess and because i'm just really excited LOLOLOL
kahne finds that youth who participate in online communities have higher levels of civic engagement.
hahahahaha! That's a bad hit mang.. Have you seen these gas prices!? The blunt rides must come to an end my friend
I love and miss you too!! And everythings fine how are you? You should text me sometime! :)
Cool...I will send you the trax tomorrow bro.
I love the ideas presented here. Think it's spot on.
all the school activities are announced on the announcements... except swiming #thanksfortherecognition #whereisthelove?
Don't forget: author Alex Sanchez is visiting Oct 24 at 3:00pm Main Library.
Who loves Washington?
and congratulations to you for your shortlisting too! V much deserved!
Why do some people go out of there way to make someones life hell? Pisses me off.
Have you heard about the grafted tomatoes over at ?!
: welcome to twitter chiara! Nice to see another Criminal Minds Fanatic joining us here! Love your background by the way.
Jus hit me that ireally dyed my hair Jet Black! Lol gotta get use to it.
When someone tells me to shut up some alarm goes off inside my body and I get a twitch to slap them.. god forgive me ! But its my pet peeve.
Rock Chalk Jayhawk!
thanks for your service
maybe idk yet
don't bother me while watching harry potter or i will kill you. >:3
That one person who can make me smile even on bad days.
Live from the inagural ceremony of Bob McDonnell in Richmond. just spotted Jim Webb. Lot of buzz about Mass.
What if it doesn't workout?
"I heard she gets around/tupac bithces!" -
jelly? Lol! You just want to see them! Lol
I don't think anyone feels the way I do about you now
#Friday Night Lights win! Yayyyyyy Luv it and miss it.
Right on! RT : And everyone should know- there is no better way to travel than rickshaw!
Sans math: if Mariners had 2011 payroll, but without Miguel Olivo, they could afford Carlos Beltran.
The world's best beaches | ITV News: The west has some of the best beaches in the world. That's according to Keep Britain Tidy, which...
you're presh. I miss you! !
ladies: learn how to wash your pussy before you expect a man to go down on you it don't suppose to smell like you on your period 365
On the Avengers bandwagon!
Thanks Laura! “: Followed you :) #JustSoYouKnow LOL :)”
#Iloveaustinmahone trend it :)
MLB needs to start
Stupid question, but what does #bbpb stand for?
ME TOO
You have a great weekend as well :)
Hating ass niggas always mad at another shine
Have a feeling that will not be the last time we see that from The SmoakMonster!
Have a safe Fourth of July, America. By pointing all of the flying explosives at Canada. /via
Lol, I would be glad to just buy another if they actually wants to try it! Hoping it will help their kid! ;)
yes I would
I'm staying up late all week
Today my husband brought me Gatorade and now I swear by it. I don't have a dehydration headache like I normally do with water.
aw bye bby
Smh I hate when people talk shit when they look like they don't have a pot to piss in smh
Went and saw The Lion King broadway musical in Orlando with today. Totally amazing! Loved every second of it. :)
alright, no more editing, today. it's officially beer o'clock.
DUDE! I JUST SCREAMED! GOD DONT SCARE ME!
Especially ones with quotes from classic literature and sci-fi shows.
hey this is a little late BUT, missed you in Pittsburgh, but hopefully I'll see you next time. <3 LURVE! (no duh?)
you guys better be on the lookout for 's new album. it's f*ckin' lovely :)
yeah jim carrey is pretty good in that movie
I cast my ballot today for dodgeball. Only 24 hours left to register for the Detroit Cup Dodgeball Tournament!
Her husband was crazy but loved his face when he saw the baby. If I get a call to come to a home birth, I will hit ignore lol
SAT word of the day: enervate (v.) to weaken, exhaust
shout out to you! thanks for the follow! everyone follow her if you're cool!
#CSOMozartBrahms Contest: First to answer correctly win! What was the last piece of music Mozart composed?
Up and playing the GMYH teaser, wow,I didn't dream this after all!!!
That's the one I kept it on. :) I think I like it better.
I like ... “: Life is too short to worry about the little things; enjoy what you have today, not what you might get tomorrow.”
hail merry by 2pac.
if i see anotha fool in a pt cap ima call you out.. get a regular beenie and wear it.. they $5.. wats the issue
hahahhahahash that was honestly the funniest thing I have ever seen in my entire life!!
I wanna know who the hell is that Atlanta Hawks retarded owner, Sixers should be whooping his ass for making Kevin Garnett playing this well
the avail of buildable lots in Brickell is almost dry. I'd say take the opportunity. It's a beautiful bldg & desirable area.
giving me reason to go harder and upgrade the brand willing to help me out
Ah!! Someone from a 12 step program keeps texting me and saying I am -4GVN- and that I am a living stone! What!?!
Did my homework in geomatry... First time all semester :D
Help Us Spread The Word. Were Tryin To Reach 1,000
made some tweeks, now recording a new track for produced by ...
When I believe and know in my heart that everything is really alright, immediately everything becomes alright for me. I claim it now.
why do you have best tweets of life
well not in the way you'd think, but after our phone convo today you probably get this a little more.
Headed to Pullman Branch Library to attend info session on Chicago Collegiate Charter School, a proposed 4th-12th grade charter school.
Thanks, Tim! Did you attend?
: and Caden that would brighten my day\or\night <3
#SHRM11 - check out the crew at SHPS. They are great!!
My inflight entertainment from Dallas - Toronto featured on 30Rock.
Kate Ellis Counseling and Cancer Services - Kate Ellis Counseling offers: -Complete cancer counseling services, with your convenience...
Robert Hegyes, the Jersey-born actor who played Epstein on the 1970s classic "Welcome Back Kotter," died this morning. He was 60.
"Never drink milk from a coconut you have found in the dark"
What kind?
Yep its shaping up to be an Amazing 2012!!! Amazing Singles being released Soon!!! JO-WAYNE n is a serious duo!!! JTP
for real -____- we're getting early to school (y)
Hello, Jack. We have received each of your emails, despite the error message. Thanks for notifying us. Good day!
Father can you hear me im callin out your name,.
this exhibit has been my life since it opened. I'm volunteering Fri, but my group of friends meet up at the Luce Center monthly.
Can't wait to watch After The Rose #bachelor drama!!!
Up now Secrets from Social Curation Pros you can ask , , and using
Welcome to our friends from #Greece! So happy to have you part of the family!
We all wish him the best and hope he stays safe and has fun while he is away.<3
Yes we did know that lol
Who should be on the marketing round? Those with passion, entreprenurial spirit and willing to take risks!
While you're don't miss the 25th ANNUAL POINSETTIA DISPLAY at Botanical Bldg 10am-4pm. An annual symbol of good cheer & success!
That's pretty cool you get to do it in gym though...beats other boring workouts.
Got to see Channing Tatum's ass and had my first Shamrock Shake
Not enjoying "Deficit Hawk Theater" in Congress. The Talk: Elect me to reduce the deficit. The Walk: Immediately vote to worsen deficit.
Yeah, that would be cool. Let me know whenever you are out this way and we will hang out.
Catching up on Archer, holy crap i love how Pam is becoming a bigger character.
Sweet... I hit it like fonzi & it works... kinda :)
The Only Thing That Comes to A Sleeping Man is Dreams”
When someone puts "[insert your desired descriptor]" in front of my name, I'm kind of tempted to own it as it is.
Yay! finally released the PDF export and Email functions for the new GA!
That's tight ! Where was this at?
Oh look... I'm causing trouble again. Ha ha.
Why is this man playing on my fuckin phone......wtf!!
Thanks for the RT!
Just got done at the court club!! Haha with my step brother hunter!
When two illiterate people scream at eachother it's probably the funniest thing ever.
I'll email it to you. Friedel liked him!“:Sis,what is the name of the Agent that showed property to you in ATL?”
Brooklyn here and we got love for you always XOXO
Fantastic! I'll be having my POG and a meal next month then. :)
your pic is still an egg :p
"The only thing that you absolutely have to know, is the location of the library."~Albert Einstein
Follow I follow Back
Fellmeth: We need parenting education. Trigonometry not used by many after HS but parenting skills are needed by most.
TFH: "Welcome to the party."
MW3 right now >>>>
Rule #1: you must never mistreat the bacon.
thanks! and thanks for your item on the list
I can not form words today
I love the sun coming through the windows! Especially on Sundays.
Niggas not real
Dont commit suicide ! Please!
What are the #Broncos chance of making the Super Bowl now that Peyton will be the new man under center?
Love wins every time and we still fight it.
Love that airport!!
I'm thinkin of a Masterplan!
Md and the moron forget about Little Rascals and the US army mascot of WWI
Our teacher brought us cookies & milk, & now we're about to watch a movie. PERF
wassup ! You're a cheap date dude.
so over this wedding project
The consciousness of loving and being loved brings a comfort and richness to life that nothing else can bring.
On many levels, yes. Data models may or not be as complex, but render-ability over time huge issue for both worlds
how should i begin this hoppin outta benzes jumping on this track like a mofo gymnist.....
Happy birthday to
Okay we got your point the first time! You don't need to keep preaching it? Especially when your doing the same thing
Thanks ! cheers to your weekend! let us know where your Vinchee will be joining you
hello im seeking out internet marketing pros to review my new site, www.ebookviralincome.com
"Running to kick a football you know will be snatched away is both insane and heroic - in a word, human." :) Thx for sharing, dp!
Early bird.
Why does it take so long to get a prescription filled?!
Keep the internet free. SOPA is censorship.
You can imagine my relief when I opened the refrigerator door at work and discovered that the pickled herring is still there.
I'm sure a majority of America would agree with marriage as 1 man and 1 woman.
Did he tweet about how much he loved a tournament structure or something?
I agree guys.....love Cromartie! I just hope none of Young's antics come here....fans will NOT take well to that.
Thanks for the blog post on your literary and TV interests.
Writer's block
be safe!
happy Cinco De Mayo & happy birthday Ashley :)
problem is that I hit reply. any platforms to recommend that permit correct syntax? not DM after all...
Last Sunday w/out the NFL until February 12
Ha! RT : Toast, cheddar and ketchup “ I want a California-style pizza... *sigh* Is there a gourmet pizza restaurant in JA?”
So long as we love we serve; so long as we are loved by others, I would almost say that we are indispensable; and no man is useless while...
Dear radio cab cabbie...just lost respect for you and love for the company. Way to be rude and ignorant about YOUR driving mistake.
take the Knicks ml, parlay with overs. and absolutely unload your bank account.
Picking up the boy-pilot at the airport. Still doesn't have his driver's license. He's late! Prob playing with his b-day present (pictured).
More $$$ & power to mismanage & abuse. District vs. STATE budget. When our officials can handle district properly, I'm on board!
actually a tough decision, I don't have the number handy, call the creek and see what they have, maybe nighttime crowd showed
George Milner talking about climate change, increase in warfare, and depopulation of late prehistoric Midwest
Had some serious #ahamoments today on the BIG IDEA... LOVE the creation phase!
So my Birthday is a week from today! And i still have no plans!
Yes let ist snow :) The first Snow is falling Happy
Go see "True Grit" if you haven't yet...great cast/great movie
Niggas say I'm fly but to her I'm god- tyga
Hi Jeffrey, thanks for your interest in the Z990. I will check on any deals coming from Kodak for you. Thanks again!
A reason to leave work on time is appreciated since I'm not good at that on my own! Thinking of a poodle mix...
second that. stay away.
If you haven't already, make sure you get out tomorrow and VOTE!!!! Make your voice heard
Anyone else still hold their breath & make a wish when driving through a tunnel...?
you should totally invite me sometime!
What kind of painting would you create of it was titled "BBQ & Saucy Land?!"
: I didn't follow you for advertisements. Hope the drama mellows on the show and ya'll get another season. Peace.
A big ass bacon cheeseburger from Wendy's sounds soo clutch right now.. i am in desperate need of food to cure my hangover
Is any one taking chm1033 in the summer ?
#phdchat: Another Fulbright tip- cast the net really wide on affiliations & don't be afraid to even pick up 2 or 3.
#rosebowl Lets go Badgers!
#ff Fun people who follow the right baseball team:
We do too!
ok Mitch is up now. Let's see where this goes...
Happy Sunday!
sorry.. Just playing around.. :)
Maine Writers and Publishers hosts local authors on Friday, 11/29 @ 12-3p. 25 local authors will be here selling and signing books!
Exhibitors, please visit our website and sign up for your 2011 booth today!
a ya jajajajajajajajaa
miss you too sis! Gotta get together soon so I can see you and my little man:)
Aint made plans yet me and jude was thinkin bout slidin down on u one weekend
hm. RT : On February 8, 2000, the meaning of life was auctioned on eBay. The winning bid was $3.26.
here i am!
there will be, now that we got rid of that ridiculous title! ;)
One day, you’ll just be a memory for some people. Do your best to be a good one.
At the Ransom Center! I'm still here till end of February.
Cant wait for Ustream!!
he kept us in contention during the middle of the season when Neuvy was struggling bad
yeah I'm so scared that she's gonna call my mom. I wish she freaking would!! Haha
Feels good to come back from vacation and have auditions lined up!
coming tomorrow: a sneak peek of some of the amazing originals that will be in our booth during the Affordable Art Fair!
thanks brian!
RT : RT to recruit 1 MILLION volunteer readers, tutors, and mentors to get involved in kids lives!
Hey suggest us to your friends on facebook and we'll post a new song :) once we hit 300 !!! Make it happen!
RT : JJ Raterink throws a strike to Marco Thomas... The pass sends Spokane off the field. Iowa defeats Spokane 69-63 in OT.
It's a different world. The internet changed everything.
I just walked n on 2 birds havin sex in Gibralter lol they was sqaukin like crazy lmao
health. finance. These are foreign subjects to more than should be.
Well that is just ridiculous. Isn't it even earlier there? That shit cray.
an i looks really nice know
Hey guys, how come no link in the Twitter profile. Am I MISSING something?
Distance Learning is an important part of new era of education.
listening to cures the soul
i should have another real good pick by Wed.
awesome pic! Happy Cinco de Mayo!
A USA jury is... 12 men & women who arent intelligent enough to know how to get out of jury duty. ie: Casey Anthony Trial
yes, yes I am
I will live vicariously through your Twit pics.
Smashing Pumpkins-the beginning is the end is the beginning
don't feel bad, I hate going to the door too.
Your brother is tearing up over here. Haha
Hey N. Carolina: I know everyone is trying to Twitter shame you right now, but I just wanted to let you know you still do some things right
Hear from the woman who brought it all together, offers her take on ebooks and
So true - excellent advice!
it was good to finally meet last night! what a guy! haha
so great meeting you and your lovely wife! Cheers, talk soon.
How is Habibi?? I've had it on my Amazon cart for ages, I should just buy it already...
Jeff's bachelor party has commenced...
RT : "Primary Sources are the great equalizers in class" from Pri Sources in Classroom #nerc12 #sschat >>Interesting idea.
Happy mothers day to all of the single moms out there we appreciate all of the hard work you do!
whats the time there
thanks, any feedback from those going through it... Or not is welcome.
GSHL 2A golf: Mark Morris 220, R.A. Long 293. MM’s Megan Schulz medal round of 46.
I don't know where I stand with you. And I don't know what I mean to you. All I know is every time I think of you, I want to be with you.
Hi Myles, You around?
Just found out I booked the lead in another film:)!!! Whew whoo
I rarely text anyone anymore.. I just text someone to tell them I wanna chill or if I'm texting my boy.
Watching Disney movies...bored...
Glad you're doing so well! Enjoy your travels.
we got a memo from daycare today about superheroes and violence.
You must be someplace warm, I nearly froze today, too cold.
isn't the grey one sick-- is sporting the grey with bright blue face right now--- very legit
Finally hopped onto the #McRib bandwagon, disappointed to say the least
Stay Tuned For #snailfishandroaches :D
Good morning! Xxo.. up early!
only 3 years—give or take—til you know the difference again.
why am i obsessed w/
haha. Swat!! Swat!!
Shout out to all of my follower's!
Damn I'm nt the only one smart gesssh everybody keep hitting me up bout they oydessey I'm not doing anymore after I'm done with these
The beast has become the master. Somebody collect the Twitter :-)
If we haven’t rec'd a message, it doesn’t mean it hasn’t been sent...Sometimes, it means we haven’t been listening hard enough.
If my Uncle Sam jokes about being owned by China one more damn time...
We party all around the world.
Last chance to see our 50 members artists are displaying works about "Love & Other Cravings."
On the way to the concert!
I'd go see Zac Efron in 3D. *swoon*
Got robbed again
* My grandpa RT Im not gonna lie i miss quince's!!! :((
Get ready for a trade up packer fans. I can feel it.
sweet u gotta go to shay and Bryns dance thing on the 20th btw. If I have to go u have to go
i will see him perform that song live
#OccupyNashville many people saying badges were either not present or covered both last night and tonight.
where at?
Hey everyone! How's your day going?
#towingagreement Interstate/Delaware and South will serve 7 day suspension in May but will keep its license and contract with city
I really wish there was more to my life than heartbreak and disappointment...
I just did this really wonderful film called Map of the World
yes it is!! So excited hope its good
Beautiful venue with a heavenly sound quality to support such talented singer-songwriters! Blown away.
Haha... RT : Damn. Don't know why you always get unfollowed lol. Twitter must dislike you
Seeing halloween decorations in the stores is really exciting.
Ready to learn more about flexible classroom design
Had a great time tonight! ☺
It is going! Busy, Busy! Did you happen to watch commencement?
Guess who got out of cermaics an hour early
RT : Thanks for the mention, :) I appreciate the support! Always!! Hope you had a great week Jamie! ♥ Aoede ♪♫
It's a wonderful time of the year: RT Tax time makes me hate almost everything about almost everything.
Nice to meet you Brent. WE followed back. Thanks for the follow.
In childhood, I use to put a little bouquet in a handmade basket on neighbors' doors, ring the doorbell, and run to celebrate May Day.
using that threat of "fear" and "guilt" in order to control others and make them believe what you believe that is at the root. Let >
Rob not again. Hes OK
Time to watch The Holiday. Shout out to bff Meredith for introducing me to this movie
Thanks for your support! Hopefully you can make it to one of our events soon.
Thinking about dinner in Harvard square tonight - something on the lighter side... oh the options are endless
You're so pretty. (:
No school for me :)
Politicians: 4 my vote, if u get caught cheating on your wife, I will personally bitch slap you. Get caught being bribed, ur nuts will go.
alphas is a great show, hope it has a long run!!!
it was! I found the cutest little cafe by accident!
Hope everyone is hungry. 5:00 today at McMurty Courts we have our first Summer Session of BBQ, Beer, Volleyball and PRIZES! See you there
I hoping to get an interview for the butler job at the Mittmansion in La Jolla. I'll supply my own Grey Poupon!
I know!! I'm freaking out.<3
We are looking for a show in Tallahassee FL If you can help or know someone who can email
If you are a clinician or parent concerned with finding toys for special-needs children
We heard that Pizza Hut lets kids eat free on weekdays (with paid adult buffet). Can you confirm? Thanks so much!
We are having a responsive design meeting today. We are very inspired by your work!
Check out the Miami lights!
Hugs & thx all around! RT“: you rock, kind sir!!! i thank you and thanks you, too! :)”
You've got a great account blurb! : ) Thanks for a follow and have a fun Sunday!
Girl... you spent years in Minnesota... you should know that!!
#idol - The judges are in the tank for Joshua. If he wins it will be a huge mistake, similar to Fantasia who has done nothing in her career.
Thanks for the RTs
I'm cooking tonight :)
good morning alex!(: have an amazing day<3
Help! Scrivener randomly compiles my chapters as one paragraph per page. Forum and user manual don't offer solutions
just warning ya'll, there will be backlash when it is found out that every single hologram is lip-synching.
Jim Morrison tee is amazeballs! :D
Haha... Someone with no front teeth hit on us.
Sorry about your experience! Did you find a place? Check out South Lake Union.
Waiting to interview Ingrid Monroe
doesn't realize that I have a shirt like my background here and it is way cooler than his :O but, none the less, cool as me he is.
In bed by 830, you know it was a long day. #donttalktome #halfdead #shitidoformybestfriend @
It's my understanding that is set for (part of?) another season. Once cancelled I'll be done with
Watch Judge Penny Brown Reynolds on Dr Drew tonight at 9:00pm EST on HLN Network as they cover today's hot topics
The 80s group has been selling like wild fire to stores! get excited.....it's going to be a glittery spring..
thanks. That was an ass kicking. Missed this workout.
just be confident and don't be shy, cause they hate shy ppl! Be spirited too!
Chamber Partners receive a Partnership Plaque to display at their place of business.
never make a bet in pasos
That's nothing new though. And I have to say that there are some really committed, talented people here who can flip that. Gotta start now.
AWS_Web_Design....thanks again for the follow. -douggieb
College. Hands down. Team ball vs. a superstar dribbling for 20 secs then shooting.
Yoga woo
Today's Universities are fine places to escape. But most people only stay 3 or 4 years. America is rich with schools and libraries
I AGREE!
you will!!
hahahahahahahaha that flipping made my day. We'll see if is going to ;) hahahahaha cause eeryone else is ;)
Aramis Ramirez is terrible. Cut him.
Yes. Real craftsmanship.
If you feel a model who makes 1.8 mil needs "child support" then you must feel a woman's place in in the kitchen. It is 2012, not 1955
That guy did not like Michael's joke, or his henway.
My mon said Carlos is way to intelligent for his age lol
This Pisses Me Off not seeing in person :(
then pass the dang ball
Sad how chris brown set back his image tenfold by allowing his Rihanna anger rage to surface again. As a PR stunt it worked but bad kharma
Also, dear London friends, I am so very sorry about Boris.
"I like girls who eat carrots." -Louis
felt led to pray for you today, praying.
I just finished a 3.01 mi run with a time of 26:35 with Nike+ GPS.
Preparing for a full day of multimedia training with our visiting high school students at #UJW2011 tomorrow.
follow it up with "intervention" and you'll wonder why you're not winning the novel prize.... Seriously!
I got an 8 o' clock appointment with God's word......
What a song to have on ur mind when waking up...
Middle age is when you're old enough to know better but still young enough to do it.
What's up with the glitter?? -#Touchdown!
"took the" not toilets(?)
Just FYI, I think that the NEH softball team should be called the Waffletown Syrups.
cc: RT : , I'll be cooking for you & crew tomorrow in OB w/ the Islander.
Go get 'em, Tiger! Wish I could be out there with you guys...
Click clack bang bang we in the murder business! Whats Louis my killas?
If only every week was a short one!
“All life is an experiment. The more experiments you make the better.” - Ralph Waldo Emerson
Bonus! Get the new Small Business Case Studies eBook (right) when you register for the webinar
I know the feeling! "And the workaholic crawls into bed at 4am.. smh! I couldn't help it..had to finish a new song"
You in #Vegas yet?
Hoppy Holidays! As a thank you to everyone we offering free downloads of all our songs on RN please have a song and enjoy, ho ho ho.
oh yes! just had the best donuts in my life. :D
No answer guess.I'll wait til she Call me
that's what that gotye video reminded me of - this beck album cover.
Little Bill>>>
with a great story, got an exclusive from the brewer
Desso Highlights the Danger of Particulate Matter at World Asthma Day 2012
9/1/42, 5 Lódz Ghetto hospitals raided, patients slaughtered, babies thrown from upper-story windows, some bayoneted before they hit ground
no, i don't want to get any work done today, thanks. i'd rather make weird noises at my cats and say inane things on twitter.
hah yeah, it WAS Friday when I posted that =)
I'm curious about the teddy grahams too. Did anyone give you an answer?
Still need somewhere to stay?
On #Leopard: Build dependency: #OpenWrt can only be built on a case-sensitive filesystem. Better fire up Linux in a virtual machine...
I want company, but I guess ill just go to sleep. Tomorrow will be all about my beautiful mother :)
actually enjoyed the #Beyonce special on MTV/VH1. Love Bey, but still not convinced to buy the album yet. Any feedback?
RT if your going to watch the Season Premier of ABDC tonight on MTV?! <3
I went at like 2:30 P.M. Ms. Simoes & Ms. Monteleone yelled at me. How nice ? Mr. Vivolo just smiled. He's cool. Very cool.
hope you have a great day
Love is when you love to kiss him/her again and again though you pretend that you don't like to
When someone says they have your back, it often means "turn around so I can stab you" What happened to loyalty and ethics!
Make #savelapl trend so everyone knows about the rally. Really need this.
do u have a feel for the breakdown of first time scripts to refills for an average pharmacy? Avg Wait times?
I LOVE the dandelion wall painting and sun ceiling light!! Her room is going to be adorable!!
....hates being given the short end of the rope!!!.
So excited to make the dress she won at #pivotboston!
burnin' up burnin' up show em what you got ;)
Man I have seen everybody here#Orlando. Its cold tho.
Where thaaaaa party at?????
"The Clever Contributor"
Happy birthday to Bob Marley, the legend.
BRITTANY IS A WEIRDO!
whoops, only saw this now. I don't know, but I'm sure we'd all chip in for a taxi if you need!
love that place! I'm at old Chicago in Lexington... Hm
haha sorry... I get distracted easily.
No one likes a hypebeast
no. They're 4 different friends in 4 different locations.One had her baby last night. Just lots of pregnant friends right now.
rt 👯👯👯. What are these three squares?
haha its fine. And thanks :) they just got up on Facebook. Lol
go check out my band
Kieffer is no good for you. For what he did to you screw him
Spending the day with Tashh exploring Hollywood and grabbing dinner at the grove.
For the love of God! REBOUNDS!!
Omg you still have it?
I WANT TO WIN A metroPup goodie basket COURTESY of AND
i hope it wasnt me telling u my story that caused u to have to bite ur toungue. if it is...im so sorry.i didnt mean to hurt u
International community has a record of failing at "Never Again" | Dr. Lori Handrahan
Saved by the Bell on Netflix all day <3
Hey! One guess at a time! LOL RT : ONE DIRECTION.? Justin bieber? Carli rae jepsen?
Wish that I could have been there with you.Love the snow!
Finding out a feature you've desperately wanted in a studio app has been there for two years.
I'm not missing today. Can't wait.
ABQ rocked the last night! Congrats 2 guitar winner Venita, front-row FBook and our TextClub and Twitter followers who won tix!
hm....snow on saturday!! And it's still October ??
RT : Verizon cuts wait on exclusive handsets for small cos. but will it make a difference? Interesting reader comments. http:/ ...
Ha..he text and said why we stoped talking..I don't know you tell me.
RT I love and we will follow you!!
If you were my lunch, you would be under the false impression that you are on reprieve from being devoured. No,no... just a small oversight!
lmao oh my
yes we are!
#AWD 3302 students: due date for Unit 2 is now Monday the 17th
What is #oomf?
2 straight hours of drumming without a single interruption. I'm pretty sure I found heaven.
hows sorority life?
Yes please I will.
WHATEVER YOU DO, DO NOT TRUST ME.
thank you! Happy New Year to you, too.
What's up #abq? HAPPY FRIDAY! More
any luck with that shipping address?!
good morn'n queen happy happy friday
yeah, i'm actually still up.. just finished my homework.. like i don't have anything to do tomorrow.... UGH! Gotta catch up on sleep.
I had a great bottle of your '82 last week - love cannot get deeper than this!
Fun Facts Friday! The human eye blinks an average of 4,200,000 times a year.
Sure thing :-)
ah!!! Wassup!!! Ugh its been ages hasent it
I lost the CA delegate #election today by ONE vote. Yup, 1. That stings.
Thank you and looking forward to reading yours as well.
Woke up and on the go now..
I agree! I have a 10 yr. old, he has read Hunger Games. We discussed it... end of story.
#ThingsICantLiveWithout GOD ALMIGHTY
of course he did because Dallas is a major tv market and will continue to watch espn praise all their draft pics
in an ideal world, spontaneous emotion is replaced by calculated analysis and/or forced responses? :P
Hanging in there! Hustling this wrestling like always.lol.
You remind me of my chinese friend...Ug Lee
Great weekend birthday treat--La Nouba. My kids are the best.
Just noticed that my twat of a roommate that moved out a month early stole my swifter mop. Guess I'll be cleaning my floor with baby wipes.
Feeling very white right now.
congrats on making a favre story even more unappealing and annoying by including Bernard expletive berrian.
oh I do. I am old. Lol.
This will be the longest 18 days of my life.
I can't walk in these shorts. Too short when I walk and then I feel awkward.
laughing so hard that, no noise is coming out, so you sit there clapping like a retarded seal.
Outwardly directed thinking can be flawed by failure of the senses, false reports or mistaken learned assumptions.
ihave gained so much weight
yeah man! it's definitely really really hard.Hopefully our new album will break some barriers and change some lives.
focusing on the job market this week - preparing 20ish applications hoping to send out 50+
what next for you? You'll be missed!
aww you look so cute!
Nice! I also miss Godzilla....
Rest in sweet peace Vidal Sassoon. You will Forever be missed.
Vickie, why are you such a hypocrite, not so funny being on the other side of the deadbeat dad situation is it?
Doing P.A. 4 game 230 @ Alamodome w/ & many Tank Downs from
Last #TitansofIT cat. is "Consultant." Honorees are Bruce Bower, Joshua Dennis, John Freienmuth, Jeff Lunsford, Abel Murrietta & John Sharp.
Awesome day! More jewelry making. Caught up with DVR. Finished a book. Winter closet. Made pumpkin black bean soup. Still in my pjs!!!
Be on the lookout for Neda Ulaby, Getty Fellow of 2009.
just to chill & hang out
My dog woke me up when he yawned in my face. My revenge: leaving him in a room I farted in.
Dead baby found at Oprah school
sounds like an uneducated opinion
great meeting you all! Thanks for support (cc )
Sometimes in this life there is no fairness, there is only the reality that life makes no sense at all.We are all at its mercy everyday.
RT hey my site is up! Check it out. is awesome. www.amylaurel.com HUGS
RT : THE BEARD LIVES!!!!!! ON TO THE EASTERN CONFERENCE MOTHERFUCKING FINALS BABY LET'S FUCKING GO RANGERS!!!!!!!
Nothing annoys me more than when I'm talking to someone about music and for some reason they think their opinion is as valid as mine.
Why can't I write any musik
she is still not buying it...
Introduced Liz, Tom and Keegan to 'deer blood' and then watched 300
Never Let Words Bring You Down Cuz If You Do People Will Know Its Your Weakness And Use It Against You
That's it. Exactly. Agreed.
Two more weather teams predict slower hurricane season
thanks, i'll definitely check it out. I've been in the market for a quality iPad stylus for a while.
i wasnt a fan of the signing but there were really no other options out there if i remember correctly
Good to hear. I'm okay, so excited it's Thursday.I want to sleep this weekend.I'm still recovering from day/morning switches
thx for letting us know, Dion!
That video is HOTT!!!!!!
Nobody knowz Your Destiny; Unless You Allow People To Design And Force You To Accept The Definitionz Of The Ones They Have 4 You
Oh I know... Just having fun...
After seeing that proposal at graduation today then seeing my daughter tweet I wanted to be engaged and a falcon flame soon
I had a pretty good time in Connecticut. Now I'm back in Baltimore. Back to the daily grind.
A little upset with micky loomis right now I mean how stupid can you be
DQ ice cream cake!!!!!
I hate a boo'c broke bitch. Can you get some money first bitch?
Fresh off the road from LA, shootin a scene for my nigg Minix song "They Don't Make Em Like Me" we do this pimp!
BALLING MY EYES OUT.
LOL Sarah and I are counting down the days until TeenWolf comes back, and I'm saving my TeenWolf shirt for that.
I don't know where I'm going .. Only God knows where I've been... I'm a devil on the run.. A six gun lover... A candle in the wind....
I'm pretty convinced that and I could make a business solely on picking in Texas. Who has a barn I can borrow to store stuff?
I need to go to sleep. I just need to finish this rum & coke first.
LoL what term do you want to forget: Topless, Dick, or IBFF??
When you hear the truth and believe it because you feel as if it the real thing
I wish would choose my outfit everyday. She's always looking her best!
I'd do horrible things with James Franco.
RT 4all of you who dont know what a twitter diet is is when you spend a time without tweeting to relax
We love you man!!!
Special thanks to for tweeting today's event at
psh I still don't even know what spotify is
medium coffee with cream
Steak and Wine night this evening. Come enjoy a Rib-Eye for just 16.95 or our Drunken Hangar for 12.95!
Who's up and bored DM me
no problem girl(:<3
what's good what you on today?
Working on a Hawaii quote, eyes are getting heavy, bedtime.
Never thought I'd love a history class. Guess I was wrong.
Some line up changes are going be made! If you can sing pop punk/hardcore style then let us know on here or our Facebook
you get a meal on that flight right? Get the chicken salad.
Watch Lindsay Lohan age before your eyes- time lapse: via
Now that you have your undergraduate degree, there is an expectation that you will spell names correctly
Omg i hvnt been on here in 4evaa
#imissyoubut i'm better without you
PRO TIP: When u see a woman reading 50 Shades Of Gray u can walk right up to her & start making out. No questions asked.
Athletes 'train to win'. The rest of us should 'exercise for a better quality of life'. CG Philosophie.
My cat would scratch my left hand/wrist area -___- now ppl are gonna yell at me... I didn't do it :/
favorite golf course in Portland area?
I'll come around...if the half full glass is Lagunitas IPA.
ya i dont remember either.. hahaha
Cindy, girl, going to a late night house party when all the teens in your school are suspects is such a fucking great idea.
we give up not only bespoke customization but our soul, no?
they screwed up the NCAA tourney one too many times, so now he has declared war.
i should! (: i love them
If you have problems, face them. Not Facebook them!
Grillin some chicken. Happy Memorial day!
Not drunk enough to handle this right now; not to mention people use me.. Ah well.
Get High...I'm Releasing My Official Single Today @ 2...Free Download
Why does my tummy feel like this?!
RT Did an interview abt social media tdy and confessed sometimes (like tdy) keeping up w/it makes me feel overwhelmed. Right?
4 words: Chardonnay Apricot Iced Tea
The best is yet to come,
HAHA PXY JR, he's not a fucking Burger King burger! What supps?
Looking forward to Sales 2.0 conference #s20c in San Francisco next week.
RT Dear I'm sure many people think you'll go to hell, but I think you might be a saint.
well shit. looks like i won't be sleeping any time soon...
Tell Cenk the girls soccer fight NOT a fight. Fights involve 2 ppl. Grl curled up in defense- not fight, assault.
Behind every bitch is a girl who got tired of being broken.
Glad you are OK!
Post- sensory-deprivation chamber float BOOKED. Look for a recap on an upcoming ep of I love you, Portland.
I just wish you could open your eyes. You took my pride and self esteem. Then you take the most important thing in my life. (brother)
stay in bed...pfff.no school...today...ate to much last night....
lol he like always does voice overs, like in that movie about penguins. . . . . . told you i was awkward
U are a wealth of info! Who is leading this trip? Would make a great story!
Los #Librotraficantes are leaving El Paso, heading to Mesilla, NM.
Dieting is evil. But what else can you do when it's a must?! Grrr
Nice job! If you need any help let us know.
What fields do we need the most new scientists? Do we aim for our biggest challenges or our biggest strengths?
yeah he does! He even admitted it and his cousin said he's a "fan" that's why he's using it
What would you like our next song to be about? We make pick your idea and write the lyrics to our next song based off of your idea! :D
I'm quiet right now, properly sated by the number of times I was able to click the PUBLISH button on some blogs yesterday & this morning.
The past three nights; I've sat in my room watching tv alone, the worst feeling is being alone. So sad.
New mixtape coming featuring F.O.E A.D.S YUNG FINESSE N A-1 ENT G.M.S SUAVE "P.B.M" PRODUCED BY DONTE GREEN BEATS N MIXING
And remember this, if you ever think you're too small to be effective ' you've never been in bed with a mosquito. ~ Anita Roddick
We keep heading east. And it keeps getting hotter. Up to the low 80's and rising.
Decided to forgo Dark Knight for a facial, pedicure, and pilates session. The guys didn't understand.
re: #axl he is such a dick. But what u say is true!
Seriously, that's actually every woman to every husband/boyfriend.
Three day weekends are *awesome* :D
Made a new video! Check it out in a bit!
R.I.P Whitney Houston. Sad such a huge inspiration is gone<3
Norweigan explorer, H.R. Pufnstuf, on a quest to find the most perfect onion, discovered the island of Aruba in 1948.
I don't know why, but I can watch The Social Network over and over
I meant apply the good wishes. Excuse the late night incoherence. :)
#TeamHeat is LIFE. lol RT : The passion or love y'all have for these teams are crazy !!
I love how ppl have super personal convos in public places for hrs...like on the amtrak. I'm getting some life coaching!
get in line!
Man these bitches
The Sam Riggs Band has opened for many great Texas legends including Pat Green! SamRiggsBand.com
I don't want you to go.. but I know you have to.. so I gotta learn to let go..
I swear if I fart one more time my underpants are going to melt...
Ironic that Colon is on the #Athletics. His physique appears as if he hasn't done anything athletic in 20 years.
Telling people you're tired when you're really upset or sad.
Taste something new: Haupia Macchiato at Spro in Hamden. Macchiato with half'n'half and coconut milk. Decadent.
RIP WHITNEY
I noticed u take a special interest in SF food truck scene (saw your 7x7 post). Have a project I'm working on u might like
Sandusky is writing a followup titled "how to get raped in prison for dummies"..thought i was going to go with a one word title didn't ya?
#boyfriend #1 everywhere? Favorite song on replay! love you, been supporting since 1 time! now to get noticed follow?X45
account hacked today, I changed my password, hopefully all's good. Sorry!
Home...sick & tired
what? Moving to Princeton?
fueled by a fake bacon BLT, I'm ready to get down to business with final work tweaking the stylesheet before
Gins and tonics were really nice, as were food items, but it was chilly in the garden. Missed you.
Thank YOU! : Thanks for following!
Can't sleep. Mehh.
Is there an official hashtag for NLA/NEMA conference this week?
Need to write an Creative and Innovation Idea Paper on McDonalds for my writing class. need some idea...
I hate you so much
It's on!
my first one took about 4 weeks, my 2nd 3 months. what are you using to clean it? :)
what kind of footage made final cut?
Adobe Muse is InDesign for the web. My prayers were answered. Get the Beta version to try out.
We live in a society where pizza gets to your house before the police.
Thanks for the retweet, Ms. Rudd!
Today is a day to rejoice. New episodes of are back!
I'm excited to hear our support team took such good care of you!
our pleasure :)
I am sfo right now. I get in around 11 - and then a workshop tomorrow. Are you sving?
Thank God Its Friday .!
so sweet be safe.. I love you all <3
Awkward moment when Dare to Dream is being released in the US now, and I got it back in December... TAKE THAT people from school
Yes. RT : fair use in the classroom: should we be braver?
how can you tell if someone blocks you?
I'm cutting off list submissions at 4PM. Thanks to everyone who liked GDM!!
Twitter definitely just got some love from me.
So gorgeous!
Were you able to sign up at the conf? I didn't see an option on their website...
CRAP! won this year!! ,next year please win for me! Tomorrow my friends are all gonna be in my face saying u lost!
Super Bowl Sunday!
SO to my brother the rockstar MT is playing with , , and Cory Chisel at
me and watts gonna come get some forreal
we are the most influential conservative band in Chicago and we are on the Cain Train still.
U must be. A friend of mine w/a New Year's Day b-day used to crack me up w/all his shitty b-day/Xmas combo gift stories.
I'm pretty sure y house is haunted because the blanket I fell asleep with was across the room when I woke up
RT RT : House music *I'm flying*
Reading over the crap I wrote yesterday....not all that bad, after all. Haha, I really should write more often :P
And yet again she blogged mood, temper, humor, and caprice
How have you been celebrating National Women’s Health Week?
How is UCR data useful?
Moving along...I guess... #Shame :-/
Parents should do all they can to answer their children's questions. If you dont know the answer, GOOGLE is readily available.
wishing U the BEST in Miami :) Go get~em :)
All the blogging advice out there tells you to start with a catchy headline, but I'm pretty sure I'm terrible at it.
she inboxed me saying they are! Lmfao. Jealous bitch
Category 5-e winner is Chicago Bears Network
Flying to Puerto Rico today! It's been a while since I've been home.
Data shows that blended learning improves outcomes, but studies can't pinpoint why.
We are IN for Friday of Memorial Day weekend if you are. 5/25. There will be brisket and challah. Let us know!
Denver #Broncos wide receiver Demaryius Thomas on stand now in Perrish Cox trial.
In the heat of a Sunday duel with as my guy #gaptooth Oosthuizen has a 1 shot lead on Dave's guy #fatso Pettersson.
I'm thinking I need to make another trip to one of your shows.
just punkd myself. got excited, jumped up from couch, twisted ankle in coffee table, fell onto chair, then stepped on ottoman foot.
So, have you read Ready Player One? Do. It is freaking awesome!!
Both Wisconsin teams get knocked out on the same day? #suprised?
The Sun reminds me of Pain!
Duke, impatient offense bounce Maryland from ACC lacrosse tournament
A Streetcar Named Desire the revival back on Broadway...feeling nothing but excitement
but they aren't as awesome as I am!
Sometimes things fall apart for better things to fall together ~
Dina, an apt description vapory and chaotic
Barber who says he faced off with #turnpike gunman: "I couldn't sleep last night." Hear his story first on NBC 6 at 11am
seriosly???i'm stay in malaysia...nice to meet u!
iced coffee>>>>
Somedays you just have to put on a little messed up and wish there is an 11 button
“: I'm really liking this shave gel. Thanks for the recommendation.” We are glad you like it!
1000 California Foster Care Homes Match Sex Offender Addresses: Report - Huffington Post
But it's good you worked. For, you know, the pay and stuff. (O_O)-b
hahaha you win this time. Yankees suck hard right now.
People who get on a plane with an uncontrollable cough should wear a mask
Great reel!! You're so cute!
When is a new vol. of Top Chef Quickfire cookbook coming out!? I want one!
“:That awkward moment when someone gets Instagram and instantly thinks they're a professional photographer.”
thankz so maybe wd should talk now well now that u followed me!!!
Great! I'm interested to get your feedback on my admittedly "sighted-person" instructions. Suggestions are always welcome.
I wish I knew. GOP keeps railing against Pres Obama for their own ideas. No end to the stupidity!
Im going to be my own best friend, my own best influence and my own biggest supporter. Taking accountablilty begins today.
Out fa the count
#IfItWasntForTwitter I'd probably get better grades.
aren't you a full time killer part-time Karate Black Belt?!
me don't lie
Wholesaler: David, got a second? Me: I only talk to wholesalers on twitter. Wholesaler: ??????
I love listening to depressing music when I'm depressed even though it makes me more depressed than I already am.
Digging 's new twitter avatar.
I lost three more pounds and now Purity Ring has a new single. I honestly don't understand my life at the moment.
Big monsters are the best! Love your music!!!!!
hey to help out I liked that YouTube video! Have a good workout today!
ya babay!!!! :) thank you!! She has been doing the butt cut FOREVER!!!!!!!!!
Its on spike channel
Thanks, John! We look forward to taking VERY good care of your guests!
Hey & - hope you don't have plans tonight cause you're going to the game! Come to JH 033 to get your tix!
what?! You're going to tell me you didn't have an Abercrombie viser too, aren't you.
Thanks! (Seems so long ago now...). You gonna check out this weekend?
Excited I move in my new apartment monday
i have my first day of school tomorrow . wish me luck ?
okay. thank you!
oh I know. He's so sweet & ah he's so adorable & just like idk how to explain it.. (x haha<3
": PHONE, Y U NO COME WITH UNLIMITED BATTERY LIFE?"
Homey game homey break homey food....doing ok
I say let's do it then, we are #UR!
You can count these two
Yay I finished my project!!!!! :)
I understand completely. You know I do.
okay, now my internet is the only thing now working
I would like to Trust Jimmy more seeing Sun Prairie is closer to us LOL
Best food
your such a turn on
Congrats on your 10,000th follower! You should go over 100k followers within 12 months of #whenwillitend Sick human you are!
#TebowGotTradedFor store brand Fruit Loops and a Wal Mart discount card
DAMN boy get on twitter more!!!!! Lol
Cant wait to see a legend tonight is gonna murder..
Beautiful article! Why did we start sneering at simple joy & kindness? If I had any non-spam followers, I'd RT this to all
Very jealous
Andrew Sullivan and Tina Brown are supervillains who must be stopped.
I perhaps owe having become a painter to flowers. ~Claude Monet
cornu it is; I'm new to them, as far as I can recall.
think i'm going to rock this red michael kors for graduation. now all i need is some appropriate footwear :)
No pick me! IM YOUR FAVORITE(:
No matter what crime someone might have committed, rape is not part of the penalty.
If you haven't already, go download our music for free!
im sure it was shamazing..
Tune in and turn on, right?? Nice RT : Tune in now for a sexy game!!
No Excuses No Apologies
baby bash remixes go girl. hahaha. #xmradio....you crazy.
Bed time, goodnight! :D
Going to be a busy week at work, but I'm more just excited to turn my desk to try and get some sunshine #Tanning while I
Too bad its's only once a year. :-) RT : Any day thats my birthday is a great day!
Windy Tip: Use a light hold hairspray and brush it through - this will lock all that hair in place, you can finish with a stronger spray.
The BTWBall Was Perfect Gaga. But now I need to hear The Queen live + see all of the outfits!
Shucks- thanks. To be honest, I wouldn't have really thought of these if not for 's work.
Maybe running outside last night wasn't the smartest idea - my sinuses are bugging out! Need some warmer air.
We won’t fall Flat on service, we’ll walk on Eggshells! I see you Semi Glossed over that comment!
#MyBoilingPointIs when people say "I have to tell you something important!" and then they say they will tell you later
EXCELLENT!!!!! I am SO happy you have joined Twitter!!! Love you and can't wait to see you xx
These headphone hurt my fucking ears
RT : "Fortune favors the bold." ~ Virgil
Funny that thinks I'm already in SFO when I just checked in at airport in BOS.
Thanks so much for this performance! I found it particularly moving to Bach in English. Is possible to purchase a copy of it?
aww not just yet - but in a few doe
i'm going to reward myself for making great progress on my fitness goals by watching the princess diaries. then maybe playing some zelda.
:'( i tried lol. what's so bad about moving your booty around for 10 seconds at lunch lmao?
Sassy @ Arnold's Feb. 17. Come hang!
you know I do ;)
guess what? Today i turned 20! (:
I hate when my mom is telling a story and says something wrong. just let me tell it.
OMG Barry flipping Gibbs is here, he looks so young. I just want to touch his chest.
Congratulations to Jaylan Tucker! His first booking with MWM will be a print shoot for Western Union!
Good cooking is an art!
. so excited to have you as a style mentor for
IM GOING RIGHT TOO !!
Your family is hilarious :) I'd do the same thing if the press was all over my family. Maybe now they'll leave you alone!
Everyone: "Myspace....will you accept this gift we are offering you today?" Myspace: "Yes." [warm embrace] [Myspace boards plane with RN]
Lifetime Movie Network all rainy day!
Happy Halloween! Doing something special at your martial arts school? Let us know!
GAH! Even my idea about ideas was already someone's idea.
tough to call in a division loaded with pitching! Maybe a pitcher this year?
ill turn you on, whats your email address
i followed him! :D
George W. Bush 2: Electric Boogaloo
And figuring out what twitter does.
WAIT!! We have not finished your New Years gift yet. :) give me more time. ;)
Sounds good, John! I think we're going to same breakfast with #salesforce. Let's order something expensive. ;-)
Skene! records - I used to hound the crap out of that label.
Sunny Monday
ok say sorry
whoa. lots of tweets from you with links. I might be inclined to follow you back, if you made some non-link tweets.
after over a year of avoiding twitter.. it happened. Now have an account.
Was that a limp or a swag walk?
can the boys give a shoutout to Nicole D from new York and #asktheboyz if they are going to do a call me maybe video:) 52
oh. my. god. this is ridiculous!! RT : the only penis i need in me is the one that is growing inside of me.
Employees photo. Brandon 'owner" in the middle.
Publishing is worldwide, Berlin mtgs now worldwide. B9 first meeting in North Amer. Now 33 signatories to Berlin Decl in NA.
ok so i followed
Hi sorry to hear that. Let us know if we can be of any help.
no ticket for whiskey fest :( free ticket for dep/red fang :)
i wanna to run around in circle too lol <333
Nicely photographed, and I liked Mpho's cameo...but I can't stand by /anything/ Nike does.
r u kidding me? Did you say that before or after Rose and Noah's injury?
Is there a list of updates somewhere? Can't wait!! Headed to Europe for a month so perfect timing.
"Adele is the grown version of Taylor Swift" Me: You did not just say that, you better RUN!
Piez shows an SVG visualization of Frankenstein w/nested narrative structures, overlapping chapter structures, density of quotations
We know from experience that HB 1075 will result in persistent and permanent downsizing of General Fund appropriations.
I went to MOA (Mall of America) So much fun
Reviewing BbLearn for implementation next fall and considering new ways to involve the Libraries. Looking for success stories!
What a way to start the half!
#primaryschoolmemories where I meet the love of my life....who I don't end up with lmao
Dude the shit is cray...I have a Steve Perry mullet growing. Kinda amazing visual haha. You doing good bro?
Wow. Last minute and I mean last minute goal for Dallas. #DalvNE. I feel so bad for NE. That was terrible defending though.
I pledge I will accept myself & others, recognize our shared humanity & respect our unique voices. Pls pledge w/ us. (Pls RT)
going to Ireland soon:D
Jennifer and Derek so deserved a PERFECT score tonight! I have no clue what is going through the judges minds?????
Just posted a few new shows. Check them out!
Today I got lunch at Calexico Cart, someone shot me with a Nerf dart, and we had an office-wide cookie decorating party. I heart
yup, & it's your fault!
Lol thank you for that voicemail saying "hey bitch wanna get laid tonight?" stfu immature cunts whoever you are.
sdfasnews followers: The party to celebrate the end of #afta11 and our brand launch is Saturday night from 6-12 dwntwn
great scene by all!
Went to Riverbend tonight, waited a million hours...got stormed on...left because we heard she wasnt playing...right when we left, she began
NFL players are true gentleman at the club. NBA Players are the drunkin fratboy ASSHOLES and the MLB players are cheap smelly mexians.
Local buzz on bike share & Highline Park demonstrates NY influence on local (SJ) cityscaping.
max we love you
Workin With !!! Come see us!!
Never received it.
Breaking news! Jamie Moyer becoms oldest player to blow a snot rocket on a major league mound!
No grudge is worth holding onto esp since no minute is guaranteed!
Can't wait to beat them at home.
The Bow Wow Club speaks to the Trayvon Martin situation and how the tragedy ripples out to their relatives and circle of friends. RIP
Listening to the great Joe Lovano wail with the Westchester Jazz Orchestra. Great stuff
RT : Always, always follow your instinct. It was how I composed. I know it works!
I'm ready to just jump off the tobin
Make the best of your workouts... Try Flo Fusion Fitness.. If you don't like it you get your money back no questions asked...
Going to Barnes and nobles to pick up my 50 shades trilogy &&&& the other book I ordered ;)
I love The man is a genius. I really want him to direct my film.
Fantastic! I hope it got people stoked for/inspired to participate in critically-informed production.
China has more English speaking people than the United States
I just want this $100 bike at Walmart. I've been there every day and something goes wrong. Is it a bad idea to just buy the display and run?
Congrats Robinson cano on home run Derby .... he's ridiculous
African Girls Are Cool...But Aggressive
happy mothers day to all you mommas mommas mommas
The eye of the liger...
Dear spikael, is it possible you could like go into a magical time macchine and come out 3 years older? Sincerly, yo favvv couga
-_- I Just Wasted All That Water. Now Im Mad
Took my parents to the park today, it's all about quality time.
..as I just said via my reply! Moseley- let's find some new biz love soon!
Happy Birthday to new Kastle , who celebrated with a qualifying win over No. 5 seed Kateryna Bondarenko at the !
Beautiful thunder + lightning storm in Portland, OR. It's warm, 70's. Hawaii, northwest-style.
www.Facebook.com/gettogethergirlsthedoc
THNX. Amazing kids. Amazing stories.
Last night #CV City Council voted to dissolve the CVRC (redevelopment corp.); it was a good idea at the time, but didn't succeed.
Bradford bad boy <3
Food for thought RT “: Consumerism is ultimately designed to get the middle upper classes to protect the super-rich.”
Thanks! :) RT Favorite talk at #carldigs today was on on-the-fly screencasts for chat reference. Cool idea!
If Crawford could've come up with that he'd have had Tulo, who was running at a Molina-esque pace up the line.
That's too funny! I can envision the student doing just what was described... Great stuff.
Hardy gets O's out of the inning. Matusz gets to 96 pitches, gives up six hits and four runs in four innings.
Don't ever think I'm not working cuz this Mind is always running at 100% . It's just the phones needs to recharge sometime lol
Who's ready for this week!? Hope everyone has a blessed one!! 😘
great win!
much better! Did u have a good cinco de mayo?
A nigga at HALL OF FAME gettin tha dome chopped up so a nigga will be brand new for #TWITTERTHURSDAY TWERKTEAM at ENDLESS
can't wait to create beautiful hair all day Aveda 2! <3
BYU doesn't have the legs to run with Iona. Maybe Brandon Davies isn't the only guilty man on that team.
. I like Hickson, and he can be a solid contributor, but "dominant force" slow your Fresno roll kid.
med school is silly.
I love you best friend!!!!
I never stopped believing! haha I am so excited though I don't think I could have watched a brewers game without
#ASECS12 Now Juan Christian Pellicer, considering Anne's patronage of poets in particular.
I hate topamax... Another 9 pounds lost and no freaking appetite yet I have eaten nothing all day. Doctor appointment here I come.
whats the spot in vegas to club?? me and the homies going out there in july from houston & we dont do sushi!
RT: Oh u and ur boyfriend of three weeks were so in love that u had sex and then he dumped you? Please tweet about it some more
Happy Hump Day to my Favorite QB. Enjoy
what is 2p2?
Thank you, Ansa! Hope to see you soon.
#thoughtsonhungergames great actors, great illustration of book, and excellent effects and costumes. Stuck to the book for the most part:)
Hopefully I don't get my braces off soon I love them, if I do I'll never talk again lol
you're awesome! Thx!
says he would like to "end the madness" that occurs every ten years on redistricting.
Please visit our websites for great sportswear (Boxing & Golf). www.knockoutincorporated.com www.miari.com
oh my goodness! Pneumonia in the summer time?! Feel better.. Let me know if u need anything at all.. :(
Tip #84: Losing focus? Go outside, take a very deep breath in through your nose, hold for a count of five, breathe out fully. Repeat 10x.
The best part of #ThenIHitThatShoulderDance is that I picture doing it.
I hold the Throne.....
Among them was a gala evening of several hours commemorating Imis life and activities
Some times you get lucky. Sometimes, invisible // and automated. Sometimes, punched or incised.
Regarding privacy: If you've created a profile somewhere on the internet you've largely sacrificed your privacy.
I've been on the pinterest waiting list forever. Can someone invite me? Lol Thanks!
Anyone have any funny parenting stories? We're talking about being intentional with your parenting this week...
I agree! I watched the Watergate hearings and it was jaw dropping. I remember John Dean dropping the bomb...
thanks for the tweet about the opening!
i want eat n park....
It's a beautiful day! Come to the Blue River Valley #Pioneer Fair in #Shelbyville near #Indy!
so true RT Rain in the forecast? Playgrounds are still amazingly fun on rainy days. Don't be afraid to get wet :)
Fun! RT : Tonight I'll be a return guest on my favorite podcast #thebillyandbryanshow where we'll be talking top 5 kids' books.
nandi need u to read my tweet for ideas
Oh man! I heard a re-make of my favorite slasher film, Slaughter High is getting made. That's a terrible idea!
What is Wichita State's mascot...the Quasimodos?
And now James Purdon on Pylon Modernism.
Feeling pretty bad right now. Can't even sleep. Desperately awaiting this so called breakthrough thatz supposed to be coming.
Ha! Well thank you, my dear :)
I'd probably cry.
You are so funny. Luv this tweet. I'm rooting for your gals to win this one.
I love you!
Our favorite spot! Thanks again for taking us when we were in NYC together!
Peru Schools released early for weather... All Main Street Church activities for this evening (01/19) are cancelled... Stay home... Stay...
Atlanta Ga North Ga Concrete Stamping Pool Decks - Patios - Driveways - Take a look www.concretegeorgia.com Ask About Twitter Special
Mondays are always happier when you're
WI Republican State Senator Pam Galloway from Wausau officially resigned on Saturday ending GOP majority control in the Senate chamber.
where are you? lol
Great Hoot in the Night event on Saturday night! Your team is amazing. Cheers to more summer camp for Milw kids!
you know I got you Frida :)
RT : Shout out to Tim, Julie, Tricia and Chef Michael #N9NE.. Best Steakhouse in Chicago..
SECRET SERVICE thinks GSA has better party settings& more booze.GSA thinks SECRET SERVICE has hotter chicks : )
Now I hear that the Indian commandos have killed 10 terrorists and have arrested 1 of them.. So what about the remaining? Terroriss stil ...
Summer hasn't even started, just imagine the weather then. :o
RT : RT : The GOP forcing the religious right's views on the country in many ways reminds me of the Taliban.
Apr 8,1952: Jock Colville wondered whether Eden's lack of experience in domestic affairs disqualified him as Churchill's successor.
Yay! Javy Guerra is no longer the Dodgers closer 🙏🙌. Sorry your man sucks!! 😜
officialy follows you!
there is a good reason I remember the exact date I met you hahah
Gotta love my city #Houston !
I had a weird vision last night: Sense-distorting technology that reflects the intentions of the viewer. You see what you want to see.
if I can finish up my notes shortly, I'll come by and say Hi
Good morning Minneapolis!!! I'm going to *THE* Mall (of America)!!!
disagree, look lakers team Magic kareem worthy, & worthy was 5x the player bosh is, ur just over reacting again
Love what you're doing & love Phila! Used to live in W. Mt. Airy, had a biz in Chestnut Hill Farmers Mkt & went to PAFA!
I fxing love this band. They are the best band ever period. Ladies and GENTLEMEN! TENACIOUS D!
sure, followed.
ooh just heard Ah Yeah by Robert Glasper
i miss my fucking sunglasses. 💔
therein lies the problem..... eventually the church will be diametrically in opposition to the state. That will be our end.
It's how our relatives entertain us during those icy winters in Saskatoon.
Fuck this Essay.
Why are there so many people hating on One Direction & Justin Bieber lately?
Real rain!
aww thank u soo much ;) for compliment ^^ HELL YEAH ;)
It's always fun being on the road. Lobster dinner in Maine (I know it's not lobster season).
could you use wallwisher? I can't think of anything that wouldn't require an account...
thanks Toni for the follow. Please let us know if we can help with any furniture related items!
ew why is everyone in my school so weird?!?! freaks omg ugh
okay! Should be up shortly!
Life's a bitch, 'cause if it was a slut, it'd be easy.
Niggas at home but they gfs absent dick n her mouth sound like she gotta accent
I wish my phone was working the right way :/
have a great one and if you ever start to doubt how great 30 is, let me know.
ifttt.com is my new favorite thing ever.
“: NBA's $15,000 fine of Pacers coach Frank Vogel is ridiculous. He never criticized officials, just the Heat. Typical joke.
Thanks Fred!!! RT Congrats, y'all, well deserved!
What I hate about pasta is how they change the shape and act like it's a different food
Ditto! RT : Ryan Seacrest trying not to flip the f*** out after "borat" spilled dirt on his tux is HILARIOUS!!!!
If Floyd falls to 22 I'd pee myself.
And i will finish faster when those lungs come in!! jaja!
Anyone know where to get some free Disney tickets?
Just realized I can't DM you :) Shoot me an email thannan <at> ipcommerce <dot> com and I'll get you in touch with right folk.
Brian Blackmore will present a paper to Am Acad Religion essentially saying my Elias Hicks findings offer a promise of "Queer futurity."
Teal, eggplant,burgundy, orange
How good does a female athlete have to be before we just call her an athlete? -Unknown
I thank you God for all you are! I am thankful for you everyday! I love you Jesus Christ!
Obama says he supports gay marriage... That's cool.
Awesome both! I think I'll be learning lots more about this as my book goes into production. It is all fascinating.
You're still stuck? Good luck today! Get home soon. RT And another delayed flight. Joy.
Brennan sacked by Muldoon, but there's a flag.
I'm open to anything
I was really craving Hainan chicken (random) but #Savoy is closed tonight! :( Any suggestions for Sunday dinner in LA?
Hottest dance party of the weekend. -Phoenix New Times
sitting in boring English wanting to go be Reckless! Even wearing my Stay reckless tee!
Awesome...i'll be sure to stop by and see you guys
Finally hollywood puts out a great movie. Go see black swan
Yes. You have a lot of energy. That's good for radio.
how can i get signed to your label
#bb13, watching flashbacks from last night, Shelly talking about Anthony Weiner, and how he disgraced himself
IM HUNGRY
lol lets stalk him together lmao.
In love with
Hey Liam PLEASE follow me!! :)
Thats not always bad! RT : Home sweet home on da solo..
Might be back early, so I'll be able to track out those joints!
I'm good Lood
computer? or...
Premiere of ARMYNEL tonite ! Very pumped !!!
“ My Lil sis works,fished school& is going back to fulfill her dreams! Only 19!! Old dumb hoes take notes lol ”
ugh i wish stafano didnt get voted off of American Idol im so sad :( he was so cute and i loved his smile
what happened to the fast food purge?
Or if you are a Sprint user, please text the number 3 to 97979. Thank you!
Gatekeepers for artistic careers - not simply talent...but also economic privilege, choice of life partner, lack of dependents
Gov's Office: $3.7 million for school nurses. Adding 400 med residency slots. (GA in great need of pedi specialists, MDs in rural areas.)
I need to tweet more on here <3
PLEASE GO ON TWIT CAM.! WE LOVE U
Definition of : (noun) Not your average joe. Syn: Greek God ; Bees knee. Ant: Loser,
Hey! #great working with you yesterday. #Follow back
What are your favorite shows so far from NYFW?
My pleasure! beautiful, beautiful, beautiful profile picture!!!!!
Delivering lunch to all you :)
Add me on facebook Reece Gymshoes Lee
So, if you have an #ssrn account, please try to log into it now and see if you get in, or get an error message. Thanks!
Religion without revelation, Christianity without Christ, the Church as ...
Serrato is gonna hook me up with someone from affliction or a mma pro. Luv my brother from another mother
Finalized my research paper. One more day. Bedtime. Nighty night friends.
haha good point....most of the time....mainly at work.
A life lesson can happen at any moment so PAY ATTENTION.
Retweet if you want a shout out.
a meeting with someone who lives there. She suggested Columbia, but there's no way.
Well, I think you/ he voted correctly the first time.
thanks Jen!:)
Senate Dems fail to bring Budget to vote. Would show gross deficit. Power is more important to them than solving problems. Slime. Shame.
good to know I'm not the only one having #wifiwoes at
I never discuss politics openly. But I am very disturb at how members of Congress continue to disrespect the 1st Lady.
Go to mungerart.com and see Roseann's work. Fabulous! So proud of her!
unfortunately we do it for the love of the game. The designers took all the money :(
And now I see another tweet that says 'I ship Zavocado' omg I'm officially dead what the fuck is zavocado omg.
At until 9 tonight, come in and see me for a cut or color!! :)
yoo we should be arriving just in time for the good times
Let's ride with the windows down!
“The only thing that will stop you from fulfilling your dreams is you.”
Yeah Wisconsin!
We plan on being there!
Had Kaydons Tball pratice today.. He is insanely good! Made some cookies and recovered from a nasty headache.. Texting my favorite guy!
glad to follow any "southerner" by way of
Ron you are so official with your big time twitter handle and your new sweet avatar. Don't forget about the little tweeple ok
RT : I open myself up to abundant success and money, because they are energy too and i am an energy being :) like attract like!
Its been along time since I've did all that haha !
silly picture hehe! :)
what message does it send to read that only 13,847 people "like Jesus"?
Lastly, DOJ's case is weak. Millions of emails to sort through--yet evidence is comically circumstantial.
No we're not obsessed with newplay.
I'm flattered.
like that Kinte
be classy...no whining
Can't wait to see at this Friday!!! I haven't seen them since Las Vegas and Pitt :)
Tonight we're going hardhard harrrr-ad just like the world is ours...we r who we are lol
nah, not this time. Weather was kind of bad. Next time, though.
Super tired and I'm catching a very minor cold! Guess I'll sleep all day today! Ijs 
Don't think so. But I wish they did.
And you thought the Cubs-Sox was stale.
I can't wait!! I don't have patience!!
Rihanna Sends Adele a Racy Birthday Cake Shaped Like a Woman's Breasts
RNC Chair Reince Priebus: WI can choose to go in the wrong direction with Tom Barrett or the right direction with Scott Walker.
Crashing into the car in front of you as you window shop the Car lots
The only reason I knew who Lily Halpern was us because she was in Peyton Sanders video. Lily & Harry- NO
Rage on, my friend. It's hard, I know. But as long as Nezumi is feeling good, you guys deserve the extra time together.
Everyone has at least One friend on Facebook that will do anything in a photo just to get heaps of likes.
lol i feel u I seen a girl with some uggs a pink shirt and with a jacket on o she was
Before you’re about to give someone another chance, remember what you’re getting yourself into again.
she made everyone aware of what kind of man he was
Great! When you're finished, you can explain it to me. I tend to confuse "work" and "expression". :D
Aren't you attending your best friend's baby shower? You should....
How DiMaggio and Mike Piazza had one thing in common, they both married Playboy Playmates.
Peggy's dress blends right into the sofa.
Finally a sunny day in Miami! Good morning! Cheers!
Again God Bless them and may they find health!!
bring in any empty beauty product to Sephora and get a free Origins moisturizer.
Awe son of the year! Will tweet u about it RT : I ll fly in to #miami to bring mom RT : Love #NYC me...
Twitter is so complicated.
The Foundation match will be 7% net after all transaction fees and costs
Its super duper's birthday! Woot woot!
when r u coming new York!! Lol
Follow my baby brother
Where are you watching #USA vs #GHA Sat. morning? Which team(s) are you rooting for in the #WorldCup?
#Random If you read the comment sections on blogs even in the NY Post and others you realize there are some very bitter people out there!
I fucking love the palladium. It's the most legit ass movie theater ever.
Pshh im so cool that Bieber is in my blood now u no when u c me u c a Belieber(:
Only assume if you're questions have gone unanswered!
Looks like people everywhere are scraping their windshields with everything but a scraper. What object do you use when you have no scraper?
I find the term nerd offensive. I prefer the term intellectual bad ass.
great time in NYC w/Inside Straight and recording new record. Big ups to everybody!!!!!!!
As leaders, we all want our team members to move forward with a presence of inspired certainty. Dean's post tells how to get them there.
Nothing like going shopping and only spending $14 on $36 worth of everyday stuff with
Future of museum's bright if we remember it's about the message, not the medium. Hence this tweet- in- ink, on paper.
i unfollowed you back when we fell out like 8 years ago i never followed you back sorry :/ & i miss you too
if you make it downtown again, we should make out. Or something.
Today I don't feel like doing anything. I just wanna lay in my bed.
how very Leo of that cat! :)
Two weeks from today, we will be putting together another 90 food baskets. Help feed a family in need at www.feedchicago.org
Internet has been transactional, but today's internet is participative and experiential (where you WANT to go, don't need to go)
Day one of the WEDI ICD10 forum is in the books.....The theme is: medical codes in ICD-10 are the business language of healthcare.
Hey remember week 1 when they said Payton Manning would be back in full form by week 10? Yeah, that was hilarious.
One direction cd released in america now Yaay! :)
Check it out -- RT : #BaltimoreTermsIDontUse is currently trending worldwide!
Wore my favorite t-shirt today to the UK library. Was warned at circ to be careful. Yelled at (booed) on ride home for wearing red. Ops
You know you're fat when you giggle and your tummy jiggles when you laugh. W/
For you I bleed myself dry. Yellow by Coldplay.
Did someone say Beer Pong? Tomorrow is the final game of our summer drinking games tournament! Come
once again has interwebz at home. No more support group is necessary.
SHE pays homage to ancestors kujichagulia ujima she pops and locks to sweet honey & the rock
#NHDEBATE TOTAL WASTE! SICK OF SEEING THESE DEBATES ON COLLEGE CAMPUSES AND NOT INVOLVING THE CAMPUS AT ALL
My neck will need a 2nd massage tomorrow per massage lady.
FREE Office Desks x 3 units left (April 22)
I could be very mean sometimes .
I'm crushing this cabana!
Do people actually dance on the beach? Or is it just a sitcom myth.
2 excedrine migraine & 1 coffee later and i am still yawning.
Cause I could see u workin there. It would be hot!!!!!!!!!
of course Im interested
welp, it snowed a pretty good bit today...
We're working away to figure out what can be done with DDOT. No official updates yet…we'll keep you posted!
3 car accident on la brea pass, after stocker, towards downtown. In the right lane.
(If you forget the email address, email your volunteering story to me, and I'll forward/post for you.)
I heart ! Free roundup of upcoming DC events via top think tanks, political orgs, advocacy groups, associations & universities
i need you here with me now. . .
#wewasgooduntil You talked about me. While I was right there
Enjoying a wind down with some à Deux red tonight. It's just an easy going red that you can pick up anytime at a reasonable price.
#hatjoke by prof emeritus commencement
Just got my VIP to Hopscotch! is going to be worth staying up for!
Aroldis Chapman warming up in the pen. Maybe the Brewers can win 1-0 in 15.
You're* <3
Fuck. Hot outside.
Please follow me.
Not yet! LOL!
RT : Here's to the Adubbers that remember song lyrics faster then school work.
I'M IN LOVE WITH A STRIPPER.Geez, if mad ever tweeted that,I would register for stripperschool before you could say "sex"
#mygraduationspeech " Fuck all of you. Bye. "
Communism is like one big phone company.
Did you Go Red on Friday, National Wear Red Day? Share your photos!
Summer bucket list - *tweet Austy * get Austin to follow me(: *swim *have fun * tan * go to beach * hang with friends all the time
yep, no meat for Mannie, hahahaha!
Jus maxed pizza wit the bro
Bite her in her fucking neck. Bite her in her fucking neck. Bite her mothafuckin' leg. Bite her mothafuckin' leg.
Thanks for the RT
missed connections
All that matter is: IT'S A W!!! Gutty effort, Dawgs!
Mulan never became a princess.Her man wasn't a prince.And Anastasia truly is a princess.The princess of Russia.
I agree that there should be a balance between face time and screen time--both offer what the other does not
Wristband still on
if you like the taste of butter Scotch candy, I suggest butter shnopz (sp?)
Two more weeks and its back to school...
Pagemodo is also a good place for facebook tabs
everyone just hates me
Talking about "saving energy" in science class,then you go home and are on the computer w. the t.v on,while on the phone..#gogreen lol
By comparison, the people in Echo Park up my bro quotient considerably.
is right. Get yer #Bucks seat for Nets game Sat. nite for as little as $5.58. #playoffs?
We don't really need to hear from Bud after every game.
Ah, a little Kate Bush in the morning! Thanks
Yes, I can email it to you...I know of Mark Weiss!!! Wow! He took amazing photos of Van Halen, Ozzy etc! Rock on!!!
The sandlot is a gr8 flick. But Babe Ruth is not the greatest player of all time. That title belongs to Tyrus Raymond Cobb.
Thousands march in Japan gay pride parade - Ottawa Citizen
Nobody's perfect, but in my eyes, he is !
"O Lord Jesus " Rom. 10:9; 12b-13 ".....and rich to all who call upon Him; For whoever calls upon the name of the Lord shall be saved.”
hope you pick us a day
Robert putting finishing touches on “Negotiating in a New Economy” speech for New Orleans ISES Chapter next week. Stop on by
Put 25 people around a table, you have 25 disagreements. Get them to agree on something -like, they want water. Pretty soon, some agreement.
nice! thats almost every day for me. ha
And u suckk.
"Gratitude is not only the greatest of virtues, but the parent of all the others." -Marcus Tullius Cicero
Friends: How many of us have them # Friends
“: Welcome home #roaddron.”<<< it's good to be home!!
On my way to work!!!
hit my line
"Goals are dreams with deadlines." ~Diana Scharf Hunt
I think that's what it was, but Dems need to embrace and run on backing BHO, though congress should present budget propasals
Who has seen
2. #Zombies cannot be killed unless their brain is destroyed
Your mom is so sweet! AND-- I love her doggies :-)
A lot of my friends don't know this but I've gotten so low that the only thing which made me feel better was cutting
NIALL I HAVE A VERY IMPORTANT QUESTION! what does 'one four three' mean when its sung in a song?
wow, that was fast...
yeah, he's a cool dude. Good power and hits for respectable average too, which we could use haha.
Works for me!
follow us thxs boo
Back to #Bluetooth interoperability testing (yeah, I know, but I did get out for MTB ride today)!
A piece of my childhood is gone, I just found out that Soul Train host Don Cornelius committed suicide. Prayers go out to his family. RIP!
#GoodOne Some men succeed cause they r destined 2, but most succeed cause they are determined 2 #quoteoftheday JenoLo Re-Release 4 days
I love my university but ... why is it this NEH Institute is a big deal for folks from big Us but my U doesn't care in the slightest?
I have no idea..
Imperial Scotch Ale is going on tap at the brewpub today! Come on down and try some of the Scotch Ale's unruly older brother...
TONIGHT!: Richmond Varietease: The Den of Delight with Corn Mo 8:00 doors! 21 and up!
bad haircuts
I'm more freaked by the schizophrenic on the bus then the person with cancer.
I would normally ask somebody to go riding today but for some reason I've got a really bad feeling about it.
I feel official knowing you're now following me;) hahaha
Hot af out.. this humidity <<
Its Not My Fault, Im Slow And She Never Tells Anyone Anything
yup and now I'm stuffed up and sneezing
yeah yeah yes!
Yohoo! Thanks Matt!!
do i no this friend?
Met John Sayles during his movie Amigo screening at the NY Asian festival. Cool.
Clutch is amazing. If you want some country, hillbilly type metal, try Buck Satan and the 666 shooters.
20 point blow out
Rain is killing my bike life.
This girl weave had to be made with beef & broccoli.
bro text me its important
Had to force myself... But I had a good workout at LA Fitness in Broadview, Illinois.
Beautifully said, Prof. Kinsella. & quite insightful. I've had a similar experience, both at Stockton and elsewhere.
were you for real? Alone?
I was a life long francesa fan until my friend and ur part time intern turned me to a huge fan
My dad just told me to embrace my hair falling out and shave it! I will drown him in his stomach acid if he speaks such filth again.
twitter that I wasn't sure if you were asking me a question or if you were simply stateing something so now that I know clearly
Thank you! Can't wait to cheer on the Hawks! GO HAWKS GO! ~?shelley?~
Special thanks to alum for his upcoming 4.28.12 OUAA Commencement speech at the 9am Schools Ceremony on campus in
In Barton's defense that looked low
The year I don't gamble in the playoffs is when I get the last 6 games right!!! #nfl win the Super Bowl btw
bad girl
it doesn't even sound like the kid has met with Bo. Really a shame that didn't happen before the shit show began
awee he is so adorable :) lol
When u stay on path and let nature run its course, it all falls into place and works itself out
Looking forward to 's Sippin' in Seersucker on Friday, tho my seersucker collection is non existent I can still have a good time
ok weird but cool
We are proud winners of the best contemporary product!
Great series! I didn't catch it the 1st time around either, but been watching the reruns. Good call!
stop hating on ja nigga real shitty that Girls Go Wil was awful listen to some real shit like #PIL2 bra thats real hip hop.
Good morning. I don't even know wtf I'm doing up so early lol.
Becca come over this weekend and we can do nails!!!! ❤
you should have a show or something have you ever thought about that
you are the pot calling the kettle black.
Tomorrow, SAT MAY 14: Fareed Haque and his newest trio MATHGAMES! Guitar Player Magazine named him "Best World Guitarist"! Chick Pimp opens!
will do. thanks for the information.
Ignorant people never truly understand anything.
Going to the recording studio tomorrow! #SoHappy! I can't believe I get to say that hahaha :P
Influenza caused over twenty-one million deaths in 1918
Yeah i know to many with degree's that can't find jobs so why waste my money, when i can make money
The Sherman Oaks Farmers Market is going on right now! Please stop by before 8 pm to show your support for the market! :)
But then Klout would be biased towards Facebook when its supposed to capture overall social media impact. Am I wrong?
Augu 30 Le Peep Lunch Specials...your choice of Sante Fe Chicken & Black Bean Salad or Bagel Breakfast Sandy w/drink for only $6.99
RT : Live your dream not your backup plan!
no chorizo, rice was underneath and we had to settle for wine - what do YOU know about paella, hmm?
We are in Denver, working with some banks that will be giving us more foreclosures in Miami. Great day today!
What are the top medications that you or a loved one need financial help with?
Haha. So what's the deal with safari. I need a day job.
What DID U Do??? I've been massaging his feet & legs 4an hour now!!!
celebrating happiness with us,happy world Health Day
Orientation On saturday cant wait (:
Heard repeatedly that EPA air rad monitoring crews were in Los Alamos. But Guardsmen, firefighters and I saw none of 'em.
Dying for a huge slice of chocolate cake!
I wish The CW would have picked up Shelter.
I have no school today yay!!!
sorry fell back asleep lol and making breakfast
SO HAPPY FOR YOU ARTSY FARTSY
This isn't nearly as cool now.
Just heard about runner in conservation area, tripped, broke his ankle, passed out, phone out of reach. Shld be an App for that
Happy Easter!! love you
Incoming from Norway ADL conference: The Gamification of everyday life: the future of serious games Sara de Freitas
yea use "mojobreak" for 10% ..thanks!
thank you so much!!boy do I have some primo birth photos for STFU parents readers...but I will refrain from oversharing ;)
Rest In Peace Dick Clark
Track drying continues and there are even a few nitro crew chiefs checking out the starting line.
is this Teresa from Softball? O.o
R.I.P. Carroll Shelby. We lost an American original today.
My damm baby boi woke up wamtin to play all early now im up earlier then normal..might as well get up amd go handle biz den
Yes go Steelers!!!
I hear ya, Just pisses me off. No offence or anything. :) I'm just Mad. My Fam needs that $
Have you considered participating in our Career Fair on 5/16? 100s of great candidates to help fill your openings in
Great, thanks.
What is the best lunchtime side for your sandwich or burger - fries, fruit or coleslaw?
season's over.
The Chester WSOPC grind continues today. $560 with 120ish regd an okay starting table with Philly's finest &
Forced to listen to Jesus music at the auto repair store.
totally! lovin it
Waving in the rain on Caroline and Madison was challenging. But we did it!
I need that for my brain.
I wanna go to Italy and Dubai and Greece next week!! Seriously, no more DC!!!
Presently at EDC meeting 2 hear County Commissioner Dennis Moss speak on issues relating to Miami-Dade County.
ayaujwhauabqiabqiagq we need to go :(
I may not have run today, but I did delete the Dominos app off my phone.
The first person you think about when you wake up is either the reason for your happiness or the reason you're hurt..
But it is nice when ur little to do all the activities and such fun things...but being an adult having to fix the the shit up.bunny please!
Of course the colors look good lol
just voted for you, you're awesome.
I find myself really liking both and #TheAvengers, so I guess I have to leave Twitter now.
RT Does anyone read Alternative Press Magazine or are you interested to read it? just wondering.
Happy Hump Day! Thanks for the follow
have her call ftd - she might get free flowers. My mom's done that 2x with 1-800-flowers when bouquets arrived wilted.
Yes I'm watching The Borrowers and yes I'm fucking pumped about it !!!
What's up with the Bud Light? I assume that's just for the beer bongs?
Don't you just love having to wear jeans in 97 degree heat? :( oh #choir the things you do to me...
watched some of ur high school highlights today.. you can GET UP! cant wait for ur future
Excited to use the new user interface!! Bring it on!
Ha! "Yes" is our answer. If it's San Diego County construction, you can only get it all - and first - from Building Velocity.
I saw a big ol’ mangy tom cat beat the sh*t out of another cat last night. It was not nearly as sexy as I thought it would be.
Dang ! I should have brought you some today !
Share with everyone <3
Soon: not just site-construction updates but actual news about a major production this year. For now this is just activity for its own sake.
My head is going hammer! Bammer bammer ugh!!
Working on and Rod's engagement pics from yesterday at the flower fields. They turned out amazing. Can't wait to share
Did you have a good New Years Eve? What did you do?
How lucky you really have it...I sit and wait for to have time for me...never knew it come really feel quite like this
Stewie, we signed you for your defensive prowess!
happy birthday yo
lol! what a beautiful chicken wrap
All I know is that Chuck Norris knows something.
No sound yet on live stream - just a long beeping sound. Hope that changes!
Can't wait till Buzz does that sweet West Virginia dance after this one!
Band work day today! Getting some things ready for our show on March 10th:AEthereal @ Area 702 Indoor Skate Park w/ Rocky Loves Emily and
Can you guess what our first offensive play will be Sunday? Most of you think you can. My question is...can they stop it?
Hi ! Have you checked out the mobile app ? Great way to buy/sell high-end consignment items. Have a great wknd!
Excited to hear Steve Nobel speak about "hugging your clients"
it is? lol
Go! Baby Go!
Yes, I think iPhoto for iOS is worth $4.99. It has a lot of features for the price.
That's because he can't win at anything. yall know what it is...
TY for the mention FREE CASH BACK on purchases @ over 3500 stores FREE $$$ not strings attached!!!
thnx for the follow...
#TheAwkwardMoment When You Open The Bathroom Door And Somebody Is Already In There
who knew this photo shoot would 2 b an all day "production"! the finished product will b worth it, shout out to KUL Magazine! Lets Get It!!!
I hate Jb
Have you seen it? <3
How are you my dear? Keeping people honest and in the know I bet;) Change only happens when we are informed!
I just realized your mom never texted me back....
#prsawebinar Looking for some good ideas to move social from one or two people to a team effort!
Home improvement weekend day two.
a canned ham! The unions won a canned ham!
August for Beach Fest an Cup Match
Thanks!! “: Congrats to our friends at on their 100th issue! Looking forward to the next 100!”
Girl on fire + boy with the bread = toast
read your dm i sent u
State lotteries eat almost 60% of the "take" for themselves. Only about 10% makes it to the promised social program (in NC it is schools)
#invitado indeed, lol. I had banana, blueberry pancakes @ Arctic Hotspot, w/ BHBeat crew
that was so quick ! All the other Arianators are following you ! :) your so lucky ! Everyone wants a tweet =)
It's gonna blow your mind when I say Dan Snyder is the Michael Bay of the NFL, then.
damn man thatz the only reason why i love America ;) i miss yu bra
In Somalia you are consider an adult at 13...If you could get married and have kids your and adult...Fascinating.
Watch "HUMAN PLANET"...
"What should I be for halloween Valerie?" "Asians celebrate halloween!?!? WOW" "Yeah..." "You should be an eggroll or something"
": #NoGasDay this Friday March 30th. Dont get gas. One day of no sales they will lose millions and lower prices! Pls RT!!"
Finding it hard to sleep after one point loss!
mixing tonight will be fun
our child dev. binders aren't due til Friday, right?
Cranky thanky Now get out and get business!
Iggy wants to be a supper star he is his time to show it
Sure. Please remind me next week and I'll send it to you.
Brazil’s Maracanã Stadium Continues to Cut Seating for Locals | Keku Blog - new blog, PLS check out, like, and RT!
New Photos:) Check em out and lets us know what you think?
Allow no limitations to be defined on your behalf - image what you can become.
#celticschat The C's have gotta keep the offence under control.
Winter Storm and Blizzard Watches in effect for much of Upper Midwest and Great Lakes Region for Tues/Weds storm
“: Bears acquire Marshall to most likely find some way to hinder his talent. It's what that team does. >Couldn't agree more!!
wrap party with at The Vault Tonite
Back in the OK!? Come hang in OKC with the tops :)
did u see his funny lookn ass lol
Hi want to help keep money in our community and schools go to www.kidshardwarekmpnay.com fundraiser
Hey Colby! thanks for following. And as always, thanks for the interviews for the Cleve show!
Old Scratch at Camden Yards
Indeed. RT : I'm covering that game, hopefully the attendance picks up.
I now have a deadline for a poem and a screen play!!!! more details to come, so excited.
shopping in NewYork is Glorious.
Knock KnockWho's there !Chloe !Chloe who ?Chloe's Encounters of the Third Kind !
young girls get more fun stuff!
You may ask yourself..."same at ever was".... First one to answer me gets an awesome pair if Padres tix. Which group?
Final grind.
Happy New Year gorgeous girls!!!!!!
connecting! Happy Friday :)
your so cute :) hah
Great to hear Randy. We're working up the Malvern Hill Battle App right now.
1/2 price #wine flights @ Montage Wine Bar & Tasting Room today. 304 Liberty St., Morris, IL, 60450.
Tonight at launchpad kdp, twist of fate,blue felix from mn, badass mofos, and the one and only Die as you fall.. Doors at 8pm
I wonder how feels right now...</3
it sure does count. Keep supporting and keep being a friend
uhh, me! Duh. RT Because the weather is so nice, who wants a t-shirt?
Happy to call it out, the detail of those panels coming together is really sweet... I'm sure that wasn't easy...
#Texas fan check-in on Yahoo! Sportacular (#Kansas #Texas)
Gonna embrace it along with my new bad ass hoop trick. :-P
Ok, just caught up. I'm with you on this one!
it's k Sandra me n tiff will tear er up tonight
Boredom is a bitch
When it rains, we want cupcakes and coffee. Guess what we had for dinner?
RT : RT : Dear "cool people", They didn't name a candy after you, did they? Sincerely, Nerds
My daughters are still young, 4 and 10 months. They are a joy! I love the portraits of your daughter. How old is she now?
shoes and clothes all over my room -.-
its not as much fun without brets flip-outs and angry mood swings haha
- Unfortunately, the lie is working. Brown is gaining significantly in the polls, mostly among white men.
wtf i wanted that.....
Hey Tweeters! Check us out tonight on My Family TV
They say sleep is the cousin' of death So my eyes wide open cuz a dream is kin to ya last breath.
TONIGHT! Copperfields. 12 am. Be there or be a giant loser.
It amazes me how classy some high school girls can get, posting pictures of them smoking. Lol...can u get ANY classier?
CanesDay!!.. Its all about the U!!!
I ain't been to a house party in a ling ass time
Saw a plane carrying a rocket ship today. In the air. Honestly, how the hell can that happen? #Enterprise #physics?
we need to hang out, i miss you...
We live in this world when we love it
i have some new followers whom I cannot follow until i get 125 more followers. thank you & blessings JMA
Trapped inside with all the snow outside.
I really want some pizza with ranch
Isn't the game tomorrow night? Wish it was tonight.
Featuring Jeremy from win there cd & a McDonalds Shamrock shake listen now on
Congrats to our friends at on their new store opening tomorrow!
Watching Persons Unknown.
your just voicing your biased opinion. LOL
#BradPaisley on #SouthPark tonight! Of course, he's best singing #HuckFinnBlues on our CD!
lol to funny
how to tell a man from a boy: a man owns up to his responsibilities. a boy doesn't realize he has them.
I love you ! I can't wait to see you on tour this summer!
tawni had a baby?!? ;D
omg i wanna watch
Randi Korn: Museums need to present numbers in terms of quality in order to communicate impact.
It looks like this is going to be a Blue Monday
Hey Followers, get access to all of the latest Conservation News by following ! Help WLCV protect WI's nat. resources
thanks...I'm off for the day. has some compelling stuff tonight...
you got hacked. You may want to reset your password. YOur account is spamming. Good music!
good to see you at I am second tonight man!
Aw, thanks! Yours is pretty neat, too.
can we wear heans today??
I want to start a blog abou 'gving and receiving' i.e. I spotlight for-profit companies/social entrepreneurs who funnel-
I get that but still I'm seeing and hear like Bynum nice but calm down
hopefully something healthy because right now...at my desk...there are A LOT of cookies...the life of working with chefs...
Look for our new interactive game at Bear Down Fridays this week at main gate square. For more information visit www.beardownfridays.com
Wow s/o to al of my new follower glad to have you
#isastc rest and recovery is a critical part of creativity, empathy, and compassion
Shooting today ://instagr.am/p/JaljQ6BPR-/
Today's run along the beach was so beautiful. 1.5 hour drive was totally worth it for the water, the sand, and the date with my love.
thanks for the follow enjoy your day today
definitely! i have my "home visit" at 530 so it will be on my mind.
LOOKING FOR MUSICIANS FOR RECORDING SESSIONS TO START NEXT MONTH
thanks for your support, Janet! I hope you have a great Mother's Day!
RT : Job seekers make sure you check out #HFChat every Friday at noon EST. Great stuff.
We have a daily lunch box special!
You guys, Veep is the most awkward show ever. But so funny.
I'd tell you to stop by the site and look at our Actor One Sheets, but you're probably all at "The Avengers."
thanks, was going to mention that the 1st link didn't work.
They went to a ball park, where men - who tend to act like men - play a stupid game for a lot of money
i can see that your in love with catss :} ahaha
The groundwork of all happiness is good health. Give us a call 619.222.0119.
Tonight the south has drawn their line in the sand and decided that they will repeat history and deny minority rights, remember what happens
Will be in seville later this week. Any restaurant recommendations for me?
We'll be in contact with your athletic director. Appreciate the support!!
We have the same phone! :D
Its that time again! Be 1st to tweet us a good joke to win tickets to and this Friday!!!
We're wrapping up a fun, productive day of learning, sharing, and growing at #upstream2012. Can you feel the passion?
Jesus saves ;-)
is the performance over yet? We are just now getting smoothies lol
I swear, Mos Wanted Crew always gets the BEsT song ! I love it cx
Yoo bro peep my song lake city (rack city lakers remix). Search Barak lake city. On YouTube
gorgeous family! !! Have fun taking those boys to drama :-)
So excited that Death Cab For Cutie will be playing the Memorial Coliseum on Oct. 20 - tix on sale Friday @ 11a.
Alright. No more moping and dreams of sunshine. This book isn't going to write itself! Rolling up sleeves. Cue the writing montage music!
Thank you for following me!
I no but cant believe your having a go @ me for a little spelling mistake in a tweet to ! There is worse going on
yes of course. what days are you free?
I do remember u!TY.Ur a treasure. RT Praying daily 4 u friend.I hope u remember me.This is christian.GOD bless u
can I have some for my presentation. That's one of my deliverables
Thanks, Mike!
I forgot about the milk allergy.
Off to work to stack some paper..
I'm so bad I deserve a promotion!
Tonight's plan: dinner & some movie called The Avengers. I've heard it's pretty decent.
Take two was entirely muted ... I'm off to an awesome start. But this tutorial gets better every time I redo it. :)
“: nobody fucks with me bro...smh” females don't respect u bro
"Lights will guide you home. And ignite your bones. And I will try. To Fix You..."
She said .. you ain't no good , but you feel so good <3
not right sir, most company's do not understand they need help with seo to be found - just putting a site online does cut it
I should use these things called drawers. ;)
Let's see what we can do. Maybe via email? Not all MJPers on Twitter
Who's going to see the this Friday? Have you seen them before?
Did anyone just hear #jonGruden on #MNF???
If the #Mavs aren't going to care about this series then I guess won't either
I wanna be a lost boy.
My avatar looks like a female? Are you serious? haha how is that possible, I'm basically bald!
!!Teen Hoot Artist contest!! If your video has been posted on Youtube prior to April 22, it will not be approved for the contest.
Wade, LeBron & Co. are about to get it in against the Pacers...
reaches out to strategically grouped bloggers and blog communities depending on news or product focus.
Layin down chillen, listening to #pandora wassup twitter world!!!!!!
Oh my god yes lamichael as a
Love my cabbage! Full of fiber & antioxidants. Look for it in the fit-hit bowls.
The Suzuki Hayabusa, named after a Japanese falcon, is the world's fastest production sports bike motorcycle.
Monday already. We got to get our flyers complete.
I wonder if anyone has noticed that I've been wearing the same pair of shorts all week.
From Code-Behind to MVVM, a three part series... - Greg&#39;s Cool ...
I will contact root to inform them of this error, thank you unhelpful webpage. I suspect that ms/mr root probably gets a lot tho.
Someone was going to give Peyton a stupid amount of money, I'm glad it wasn't us. Would rather have hillis, winston, and 6 draft picks
ya I know I followed u :)
she is awesome huge career move for her
The Arizona #GOP debate: 4 millionaires, each proclaiming omniscience + omnicompetence, thereby exposing fundamental ignorance of the world
RT : Q2) What technology do you wish you *could* live without? What's preventing that?
Why is it I say something nice & you are sarcastic! Smh
good to meet u too sista. Have a good one and keep in touch
The market manipulators were able to contain the damage, but took a loss, nonetheless.
Ugh. 88? Please just give me an A. 😢💔
i need to make a quotebook for the funny things my students say..
did not vet every link on the page, but no, not saying that
any idea when the last time Duke was knocked out of the tourney in the first round?
Headed to get some five guys!
where the honeydips at
love it when he makes me horny hate it when hes not here to do something about it
*chokes on cereal* WHAT??!!
Just wait until the guys face melts. You're talking about movies right? :)
3D t.v., why am i so freaken modern??? gosh im so cool,
RT : "The agency as you knew it is dead." They use collaborative teams to build strategies for clients
Is no. But you're cuter thN both of us :)
RETWEET If you love yourself ! :-)) <3
You dont have to make people feel bad about themselves just so you'll feel good about yourself. Its pathetic and you need to stop.
"They fall victim to my system, guess I sure know how to pick em"
I'm still standing. All by myself...but wait I'm not alone, goodness & mercy shall follow me all the days of my life.
hahah take me? :p what?
in high school I was encouraged to build edtech apps, but I had to really take the initiative to do it
That sounds awesome! That restaurant just got added to my bucket list.
MKE Firkin Fest 2012 is July 21. Save the date hop heads!
hahaha uuummm let me think about it
If you think Chipolte is fresh Then you will be totaly amazed to eat at ZuZu. We sreve nothing that we have not made ouselves. Real plates!!
is writing, but not really getting anywhere
Hitting the sheets! Got to be up early for work. Sucks sleeping alone wish I could share this big ass bed with someone.. Night yall!
thank you! Coming from you that's a real compliment! :)
Is it rookie night in the Georgia Dome tonight.? Williams and Green? #Packers What the he'll is going on out there?
"one day, i tweeted justin 100 times..." HAHAHA! girl, ive tweeted him 1000 times.
tickets are still available
Ask about our new LumaFirm facial! Introductory special $69! Originally $95
TY! RT : Really great #Momovation Co.s to to follow:
Brides to be come see us at Hotel ABQ today! Perfect wedding guide show from 1-4pm!
Thanks to all of our ! contest entrants. Congrats to on winning the tickets! Stay tuned for more contests.
Good morning! Hope you all have a super sensational Sunday!! :-)
nice job girl (: Knew you could do it!!!!
for movember, are to
Finally home, so glad I get to sleep in tomorrow. Tonight was crazy.
I fell in love with the person u were not the person u r now💔
Will Ferrell hosting #snl this is gonna be a great one!
Dear Apt Renters, please don't show me a view of a rusty barred window as you description of amazing views.
Yet those with tattoos are still severely judged based upon appearances.
(c) nerve to sit there and be like 'omg all these ppl sound SO bad.' Lol bitch please. Stfu.
pretty upset about this weather homie. Hoping to get my tan on today!
awesome sounds great
ANYBODY WANT TO SEE THAT NEW FLIPIN INK VIDEO BY
Preach it!
Perspective Magic!
This looks really amazing! I will take good look at your link! Please also follow me mostly at
oh god..its okay so does my mom
can't wait for you to speak tomorrow
thank u to all who visited Interiors From Spain at .see you at Habitat Valencia.And remember to check www.fromspainmagazine.com
Thanks for the shout outs to our blog!
So humbled by response at today's session of #CreatingChange ! Thanks to everyone who came + to those of you who stood.
For a family that has children and pets, installing porcelain tile over a natural stone such as marble may be a wise choice.
Not Friday, ,but I am going to Chips and Salsa Saturday.
I've never uttered these words before, or even thought them, but I'm kind of regretting the popcorn.
question: I don't understand when people say gay rights isn't a civil right bc they can "hide their gay-ness." What praytell does this mean?
good morning everyone & good morning to our latest follower !!
Jamie: "We call that in the fancy business 'amused bouche'"
so lucky!
Hello everybody, we're currently having issues with our website that is preventing customers from completing an order.
Gosh, I love you so much.
Shut your whore mouth.
!!! #2moredays RT : #hungergames has a 100 percent on Rotten Tomatoes. I've never been so excited about anything ever.
Come to the summit :)
Chris Berman is doing Sportscenter? (click)
But we could definitely be MUCH smarter about this - something like your suggestion will happen soon enough!
Is the best love convenient or inconvenient?
will make a donation to the Jane Goodall Institute (JGI) for every moviegoer who sees #Chimpanzee through May 3
Lol you have nothing else to say so you're pulling retarded comebacks out now? You're a joke.
Blago's press conference didn't answer any of the issues causing his impeachment. Simply not focused. What was the point?
Phones are funny things. Even for a short inter-office call, I feel compelled to offer a greeting and a farewell.
no just five for all of them
RT : Working on my fantasy football team
Don't forget to join us next week WEDS 5/16 1pEDT for #Marketing Series w/ .. thx for being a part of
We are having a great day! Hope you are too!
You know you watch too much CtCD when you can repeat just about every word Shwick said.
Fingernails grow nearly 4 times faster than toenails!
One shot ur heart wit out breaken ur skin no one has the power tho hurt like ur kin
New day new opportunities buy now US real estate and you get the deal of a lifetime
Play Doh? My goodness you are easy!
Arthur Wellesley~ Be discreet in all things and so render it unnecessary to be mysterious about any.
<---Is not doing good
i want some chicken
lol you right you right
Can we call him Brooks "Brad Nelson" Conrad yet?
when you have $5 million laying and all you can think to do with it is bet on the SuperBowl, I'd say your doing well.
I just hate it when you make plans and as soon as you make them they get ruined...
how many out there are with me when you are here for multiple reasons and not just to be a clown! , i am advertising, i am outsourcing,
Boy you claim you got swagg but you wear the same SnapBack in every picture 😌😃😄😂
When I was in high school I dated any guy who asked me out. I thought no guy was attracted to me!
This weekends parties - Friday at Roxbury and Supperclub this Saturday for Cinco De Mayo. Hit me at 310.971.3346 to RSVP and for tables.
Amarillo Slim Still Alive and ‘Fighting Hard’: Brunson Says His “Goodbye”
Do the #Grizzlies take this back to Memphis for Game 7? If you can guess by how much, I'll toss you a free item of your chose. RT
Bringing Innovation to Financial Literacy and College Affordability
so get out get out get out of my head ! im sick you ! suck my dick hard
Every time is rains i always sing Umbrella <33
Its crazy cause selling your brand into big box or dope boo-teq...who makes money in this biz, some people do phat...Have to get the outline
Favorite inventions: sponge hair rollers (when I was 6ish), velcro, dawn dish washing liquid, ultra suede. Wow, I'm easily impressed.
Dnt cross me
This "Ron Artest" - "Metta World Piece" complication Is getting corny
What to think now.. it has been about half a year since I have lost my job..
I have tri training from 7 to 830/9ish... dinner by your work or I can come over after
I find the outrage comical, honestly. RT : I am so over talking about the breastfeeding lady. Over. It.
Hey!(: who won?
The Circle of Sorcerers is undergoing audiobook production. Should be available in December. :)
are you coming today?
My sisters and I may or may not be singing karaoke at a random bar on Fremont Street.
“: In the practice of tolerance, one's enemy is the best teacher - #DalaiLama #quote” so true! Have a wonderful eve. Fiona!
Thanks for the link, was having a hard time finding it.
cute emoticon :3 how's life?
Silliness makes your #soul smile, so be silly today and #Smile !
Complete BS City of Cleveland... If you are going to have your lots closed, you need to notify people ahead of time... Compete BS
love u ladies!
all i want for Christmas is you <3
josie! how come you weren't on mcc much tonight?
I will never say never! I will fight.. I will fight till forever!(: <33 I Love JB .(:
Omg I got a D.
just because he's friends with cody
Im just waiting for the final bell to ring at 4:05 so I can go get my haircut -___-
as an irishman, i can tell you it's paddy not patty. american culture has somehow mixed this up.
we love it
i want to go shopping!! :/
is next week your ex-coworker edition?
All Guestroom renovations are now 100% complete
Right, people should know to queue in an orderly fashion to loot.
With the new online auction, you can decide the price you want to pay for surgery just by bidding and participating
likewise bro. I'll ask him to send you some snippets of his beats. What's your email
What was your worst vacation experience?
When u turn all the lights of in ur house and ur at the bottom of the stairs (first reaction) RUN LIKE HELL
same all soon as I log in on my computer I strait away go on his profile to see if he uploaded more tweets or pics
The Wii's back fan should be spinning while it's on, right?
I think that the contenders will use all they plan to use by the time bidding starts. A team ahead of them would bid more.
lmao I knew you would eventually tryna defame my tweets nshit smdh
Ahaha #LastTimeIChecked u still a bitch
bryz=overpaid now & you just lost carter's 36 goals. if you think stamkos is going to philly, you are insane.
Kristie just said, "You're turning 18 next year! ARE YOU EVEN IN SCHOOL?" omg
Really anxious to hear what you guys think of the VGA's announcement tonight!
Blog apology time: there's some new entries in the works, but not quite yet. Thanks for the patience, if you read the thing.
Thanks for following! I will follow back!
hey, how u been? in Sydney?
#smcrva post pics from events & get ppl to tag themselves
We sell more Carnival Cruises for 4 straight years then any other Travel providers!That,s Why our prices is lowest.Go to: www.FreeXpedia.com
How is a teacher late to the final exam? Come on, I have a 3:30 tee time. Smh
Make it nasty
RT : Social media has enabled athletes to become the media. Note the feed right now re: lockout.
While watching the Straw Dogs remake is a swift reminder they can push out impotent, faceless entertainment despite this.
Every semester, I can imagine the face of every student who didn't pass, and I can see ten things that could have be done, and I'm sad.
you have no idea. I've been there. As a matter of fact, some of my first tweeted pics are from Sergio's. The place is crazy
I feel like we need this to happen right meow!
March 12 is a special day for everywhere. We're celebrating our 100th anniversary.
Finally getting around to making my own arrangements. Want to get there for at least some of the show.
Let's also not forget about the inventory build in tech & weak macro trends for the holiday season
Q3) You really need a consultant.
Deuteronomy 10:18 "He defends the cause of the fatherless and the widow, and loves the alien, giving him food and clothing."
You start the week hitting the gym hard, you finish the week hitting the gym even harder!
Is there a fit for Dave Logan with #CSURam football?
Lost my fucking voice...cant even talk....ugh!!!hope it come back b4 this week up..
why do you call her Slimer...
All just happen to be wearing #darkbluejeans aswell as all holding there iphones
is going to be at the Etsy booth this Saturday at #CraftyBastards representing CREST!!! come visit me from 2-4!! :D
yes we do
thanks for spreading the word about our articles!
Listening to my Pandora station enjoying my Sunday!
we're all members of #packernation, so lets show who we are!
Well thank you! We do think we've got this Pies thing down pat!
My iPod's lock screen is the hunger games and says let the games begin but my background is the maze from the maze runner. Im so complicated
“I wish someone would give me one shred of neutral evidence that financial innovation has led to economic growth ..." Paul Volcker, 2010..
About to redesign my entire studio set up.
freaking out ! Where the hell are you !!!!
Indeed. RT : Twitter can be summed up in 4 catergories: Creators, Debators, Haters, and Masturbators.
follow back please?(:
#YouShouldNever say never ;)
Dear Nashville (West End), it's 5pm. Thanks for not yet cleaning my room.
Bruno Mars had some gr8 Elvis & James Brown moves!
This bus smells straight up like an em effing port-o-john.
We can't wait!
I finally found the one thing Bentley won't eat..ironically..her new heartworm pill -.-
same as you! Sophomore! 2014 baby~
I hope to see all of you this Friday at the Handmade Marketplace to Support Buffalo First! I'll be there with my handmade scarves.
miss you bro.
how many more days of school left?
#quote The trouble with referees is that they just don't care which side wins.Tom Canterbury
NICK JOHNSON STOLEN BASE!
I don't think so, she's been going to events for a while without being in publication.
Vegau Inc. Launches New Internet Marketing Website
All three?
I put foam core in the recycling bin and was dubbed an "Anti-Recycling Awful Earth Person"
LOL, love that idea!!
Don has to be joking about that hammerhead shark , it was about 10 inches long. Got me laughing tho.
what about an indoor track?
From the great Fernand Point's notebook, "In all professions without a doubt, but certainly in cooking, one is a student all his life."
I got my VOTES for in today! Did YOU VOTE yet? Plz B sure to use code 805 for Scott to WIN! Yay!
hahahahahah STOP. Where?
a good choice for a first stroll! :)
All new floors for NCAA tourn. been doing it for a couple years.
SAVE the DATE: T&I Convention, March 7-9, 2012, Washington, DC - We have blocked rooms at the The Mayflower Renaissance Hotel for $281!
who won the Massive Monkees competition?
juss crossed over the Virgina border.
Fasho my nigg, let's get it
it's another copy of my book.
Good luck to . Make EDM proud!
The whole stickK team is supporting you!
Yikes! to paying all.
Always glad to help! Give me a shout when the demo comes out and I'd appreciate if you would check out ! Thanks!
Toliet paper rolls look like oversized marshmellows with a ginormous hole in the middle
Pixelpunk: moveable type, gramophone, photo, &film never happened — all media was always digital &very pixelated.
My obsession is crazy.. I feel like a stalker trying everything 2 get this guy 2 notice me.. Any suggestions? I'm open!!!
Happy birthday to the beautiful !!!
stay on the field on the grind ! No days off
it's been a min since i been on here hey hey
Your work is fucking killer! Addiction piece (kid with crackpipe and monster) is Gorgeous.
Fight poverty with education - Jamaica's new PM Andrew Holness
Are people not getting measles shots these days?
did you participate in the riverside career day?
#Highpointmarket Any of you Interior Designers, Please feel free to make an appointment with us if you would like to come stop by and see ou
I've had my twitter for exactly 1 year today (: 
Live, Love, Laugh..Live each day like its your last, Love with all your heart, and Laugh through all the tears! ~~~~~
LTGWS didn't really work for me, beautifully written tho its components are. But I enjoyed yr xcellent review.
Fall break. Took vacation, since we still had to work. Shopping in Toledo.
make Liz wear a bow, im dead serious right now.
Happy Thanksgiving everyone!!
I can't believe the released you, they don't know how to handle talent
Eminem sleeper star of #SuperBowl ads. I'm on my way to buy a car and drink some tea. #Lipton and
I'm lost. Not physcially, but mentally.
whatever it is sucks to be you
Sixth Man!
Does anyone besides use the word #Longevity ?? lol
Stephen A. has called us boring old & made fun of Patty Mills & Tiago Splitter & yet the Spurs are stil beating the Suns W/O the Big 3.
not the shoulder
what is the red stain on that chair????
Thank you :)
WE ARE HERE TO
Waiting to hear the one and only !!!
Running has the power to change your life. It will make you fitter, healthier, even happier. -Selene Yeager
Dm.: no sorry that was my fault
this is best shot until next year. We are in line for the number 1 & 2 recruit.Noel could be better than Davis on defense.
Was rooting for Game Of Thrones but am still happy with the Boardwalk Empire win
“: wth!? Jus got home n checking twitter, I'm suppose to see,"bum wins his 1st ring!!"sigh..see u in Nola”
omfg im screaming YOU'RE GOING TO CANNES?
yeah I know
Whaaa!!! I think it was super bad timing 4 him & as a independent I dislike him, but im not in favor of any of the candidates.
Thank you Scott Walker for triggering the Law of Unintended Consequences. Now the People are coming for you!
Look up bull$hit in the dictionary. Now, Google Santorum and tell me which one you'd rather have on your shoe.
Well done sir, well done.
hahaha love this so much! :)
I'm going to my cousin's house because she just graduated.
Driving range
a pleasure meeting you too!
I hate when guys call a girl hot or sexy, that's what you call a slut not the BEAUTIFUL women you're in love with.
is a fragment after a comma.
lmao on me trell stayed home to
no you did a poor job of picking him over CP3. Not happening for big Marv
Winner wins a voucher for 2 kids to enjoy during a or show, or
To meet & really get to know That's all I really wanna do
I could be on a boat.... but I decided I'd rather be at 91X playing music for you :) boom!
RT @ ScienceChannel Star Trek fans! scientists will one day build an actual antimatter propulsion engine similar starship Enterprise >> htt
Hank Williams Jr. was lucky to have that Monday Night Football gig. I always thought his song was lame.
HOW TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD: 1.) guys there's already a book on this. I don't have time..
LETS GO #CUBBIES!
Will #herhopness be gracing us w her presence? RT : Dinner Friday NoDa Brewing Company 5-9pm
Tonight, the first video from "Music From the Film CENTER OF GRAVITY" goes live.
Texas Family Law Tip of the Day: Post-divorce spousal support, or alimony, is rare in Texas but it is possible under certain circumstances.
hey do u have a cell phone?;)
We need individuals to work from home. The pay is $1,000 weekly. Send me your email address for details. This is not a scam....
a soccer match for you. wider goal, second ball? MT : Dominican Republic 0 USA 14
NO I DON'T GET IT YET HOLD ON IMMA ABOUT TO .
#Vegas! Come party with us now! Doors are open & we have $2 Drafts & $3 Jack Shot #DrinkSpecials until 11pm! Free Dance lessons in 15 mins
Overdubs are happening today in the studio! So excited for #CFNi38!
guess ima do the same go to oomf and stay over there know she gon cook
just joined the AP style twitter channel. journalism nerds unite!
Thank you Austin, you made my life is better(:
Hi! I've been terribly here lately...just watched #DWTS on hulu...loving the new cast! How've you been?
Im happy for you
I actually won a game of Disney scene it. I've never felt more accomplished in my life.
Desean Jackson or Kevin Walter?
- Finnah eat my hot wings .!
I really didn't like the way she jokingly blasted all of my business but at least God knows I was honest
Hey Dear, I have to quickly sweat it out at my complex then run to meeting but def putting in time at the LA tomorrow;)
Writing my first long-format magazine piece in a while. Looking forward to using new Droid recording app today for background interview
Just wait till tomorrow gorgeous.
That works for me! Thinking Farmers Market...to start.
I love background photo. Every time I see it, it makes my day. LMBO
I'm goin' all out at #KimColes B-day night. I'm livin' n the fast lane by ordering a 7-up... with ice BABY!
Your Welcome 🎤♫
balls deep tho?
Pride is this weekend.. I'm excited!!!
snap your finger off? Hah I wanna know the story with them ears hah. Send me a dm
EVERYONE MUST FOLLOW ;)
Trying to turn a tee shirt into a cute tank top = #craftfail😣
Just consumed so much Benedryl you'd think I was celebrating.
That Mitt Romney bullying story is crazy, what a mentally disturbed man & to think he got thus far in government
At Amoeba Records LA: What will i buy? what should i buy? new KILLS? New ACID HOUSE KINGS? New PAINS OF BEING PURE OF HEART?
alex somthing tells me ur gonna follow me today hhhmmmmm lets see if its true ;)
YNN received the email however it did not include a link to your site or info regarding an upcoming event, or story idea
weird man, I cannot export vid longer than 30 sec from my iphn 4s... did you upload str8 to utbe?
Am I considered an #og follower... or am I just considered Awesome? Probably the latter? Great. Also, call me later about Circus
RT : Don't get desperate! Desperation is a weak emotion and it produces weak results. Be patient, it's coming!
My #ZOOM360 owned the Town Lake trails today! That is the perfect jogger for me!
You tell me to go wit somewhere.. & i say hell no im sticking w/ ONE DIRECTION<3
hey that makes me skinnyish LOL
Brilliant! Thanks for sharing that.
And how does that make you feel?
Took my Wheaten Terrier 14yrs to vets. Still in great health!
If you are tweeting right now and it's not about Whitney Houston, you are dead to me.
North American media release today announcing the official launch of Web-e-Books and Cache-It. Search The Tri-Screen Connection anywhere.
The Packers remain undefeated AND N. G. is kickin' booty at the polls? Could it be the world is NOT going to hell in a hand-basket...yet?
I can't I'll have to go down 2 stairs
Thanks Susan--I'll check it out.
oh boy. Lol
yea I will never again do the buddy pass thing
so true...gotta see jacoby steal home again.
I know, right?!
Good morning ready to see what my day is going to be like
Sometimes i wish i could just drink to where i dont have to wake up to this bullshit world
I saved her one piece of bacon...but it was the best piece.
a skill I always feel the need to improve upon.
oh fuck thats brutal o.o
Every time I trust someone, they show me exactly why I shouldn't.
can college hurry up already?
Charleston - cleaner, safer and the best restaurants in the South!
You've got to be kidding me!
i can't wait to hear what the news is!
Sun then clouds & a few *isolated* showers this afternoon. Temps in the 60s. Saturday is phenomenal...sunny, mid 70s. Enjoy!
Grilling some ckicken
yes ma'am
I'm from Spain and I love it!
All sorts of pageants this weekend!! Mrs. US, Miss Teen USA, Miss/Teen Intl...I am in HEAVEN!!!!! Go Reign ladies!!
Right back at you - it is thrilling to be a camper! RT : 1,2,3,4 Here's smore campers u need to know-
Get connected with us on facebook! Search on facebook in the bar and find us! Become a fan....
...No...I WILL STAND MY GROUND WITH OR WITHOUT THE LAW ON MY SIDE... I AM NOT AFRAID...
but you sound so much taller on the phone lol
cute cute but and butt! Cute n but n butt!!! Lmao!!!
I am very frustrated with social media hacking. The security systems for these sites is going to have to get harder to get into...
@ the first pageant workshop with Ms Ethnic World International. She is coaching on "How to be your best during the pageant competition"
At a bar talking to some other NYC peeps abt politics, interracial, and same sex relations ...the locals hate me.
it was always cool
Yes! Ali G is on! One of my favs! Best to snuggle on sofa and watch whilst you're ill :D
- Thanks for the follow friends! Have a great weekend.
Any hope for Laporta this year?
People have wasted so much time bsing me in the past. They underestimated how much I really cared.
I was there the whole time you guys just dipped
what's up blood, fuck you been up to
You're a jazz fusion shenanigan.
Trying to make something from nothing! Follow me...
was it fun?
welcome nick perry
yeah me 2 but i dont want to do a old song
Hopefully I get to see the 4th quarter.
"If true love makes me a faggot, then I'm a faggot." -Nick. I love him<3
"Spinning truths and out of control into self-destruction."
I hate when I have to download the new version of iTunes on my computer.
amazing! My life is getting better and better each day!:)
okay I definitely will.. Saturday lunch might work best for me.. But I'll let y'all know closer to time.
okay thank u!:) and my cousin saw some of your blogs and she luvved it:)
On my way to check out the new Lush store in Fashion Valley. Could this be the answer to my last minute holiday shopping dilemmas?
Looks like it is going to be a perfect weekend for camping! I can't wait to get away and drink beer around a campfire.
RT : recruiting the perfect kickball team is a fulltime job.
Repeats of Dancing with the Stars which for some reason is on Game Show Network.
If i was another man with the same personality would u still love me
Off to get my work uniform.
#MEMPHIS AND SURROUNDING AREAS! TELL YOUR PEOPLE TO FOLLOW US AS WE BUILD!
NIGGAS IS UP LIKE THEY GOT JOBS TO GO TO LOL
haha oh your very welcome ;)
Sometimes I'm scared to fall in love.
This week is going to be awesome. Getting out at 1 from school, going to a club with my cousin, and hanging out with my friends. So excited!
Thank you Jesus!!!
RT : We need another Stevie Wonder.
#MyLastWishFor2011 is to meet !!!!!!
does anybody have any Moose Munch?
me too!! I'll let you know if I find more out :)
So Sandra Fluke and Hilary Rosen were replaced by a dog by Axelrod. Sounds like a Sherwood Schwartz sitcom.
how real is all the drama? Do you moms and girls ever get a long?
8 tuff miles foot race in St. John, USVI today. Over 1,000 ppl running the craziest course ever. #Right #Coast #Marketing will be watching.
Shabazz Muhammad and Tony Park to UCLA to open the new Pauley star power
I was frowning at the balance on my accts... But then I remembered tomorrow's #payday yes!
Well I guess I had better get to bed. Got to get early to play golf in the morning.
I don't know why you find the question offensive, but I don't really understand what you're asking.
Industry night Check it out!
Hey Sammi from Jersey Shore has no VTine either. Maybe she could be your VTine
Is back on TWITTER!!!!
Fun rhymes, Norm. Thanks for the follow.
Keep on dreaming even if it breaks your heart.<3333
Sometimes we need to cry, so we could see clear aqain. Just let the pain qo away. !.!!. =]
RT #RIP NATE DOGG condolences to his family,kids & comrades sending our prayers an luv!
Can't put into words the epicness of what I just saw. just became a LEGEND. THAT is what makes me LOVE being a fan.
I TiVo all WPT Events and I was in Vegas watching the 25k WPT championship and my Dad and I were on TV!! So freaking cool. I TiVod myself
Ah to work, sound of systems failing
I promise you this, promise you that, whatever you want as long as i got it ain't no problem with that
lol i know
is taking me to for my birthday! Nice that Madison schedules Restaurant Week to coincide with my b-day :-P
you are very kind, but It was just a RT Duck Dunn was on of THE finest bass players. He played with the best of 'em!
Damn I love Mrs. wrong..
Familiar faces, worn out places. Can't wait until my traveling kicks up again... 👍✈✌
My dogs thing is treats.... Of all kinds!!! lol
When it comes to food I'm a fatty
Dear God, some cloud cover would be nice, thanks. Why did it have to be so hot today of all days...
": #cfafghts way to "captivate" the submission." Where you at Pat? I thought you'd be at Legends.
Last day in the library. Let's do this.
RT : NIH is stepping in to actively seek partnering opportunities says Anderson
I can't wait to get back on the grind with you may 29th
Times TWO! And who knows what it will be come 2029.
Once again Talley is ruling. Your friendly neighborhood Spiderman, now w/ Rick James stories AND biting social commentary
don't forget the camera for tomorrow! :)
Wow we would get suspended :b
Hey! What's up?
My ipod is completely donzo
I in research for help to safe my daughter, If you know are have any idea what can be done read my next step on kristy symptoms.
has the best presentation period Wish you did picture in picture for all sports! Especially what u did with commercials
--le cries because im not from LA & wasnt invited to the listening party for Paradise--
Pura Vida - nice article! It's a beautiful country - it just has become a bit too commercial over the years for my taste
That is the Wisconsin Curse.
Dear TV manufacturers please allow me to flip between 3 channels.
that's a good marriage man.
Well How Do You Know I Can Go Unless You Ask Her!
how messed up are the ESPN power ranking. everybody knows OKC is number 1
oh, that's me then! ;D
my dude!
naw im just use to being up this time of morning, i sleep all day
duh. of course.
Evan Longoria Injury: How you can replace him? | Fantasy Baseball ...
not really...I know all her secrets!!! LOL, JK :)))
great #friday night!! night ;)
What song of either Rihanna or Katy Perry wish was urs to record or write?
Always wondered if John Wooden could successfuly coach "today's athlete". Would love to hear Jerry Sloan's answer to that question today.
Thanks 4 your interest and support. Much needed and appreciated.
Dats Right RT : Quality over quantity
Congratulations to New Jerusalem Primitive Baptist Church, for upgrading to Divine Graphix Inc. Another Network member in Divine Order!!
its always drama at the school i go to ! that school needs to be called Drama High !
But it sounds like it might be a similar paradigm shift that went on from Digital preservation to digital curation or digital stewardship
welcome to L.A
When I saw King's Speech, I knew Tringled would work. Middle-aged people working on a high-wire without a net. Who wouldn't watch?
first time I've heard that claim too. thirty years of public funds, apparently.
Thank you! Happy Valentine's Day to you too!
I've read one chapter and I'm already terrified by the book club book, Good News Club by Katherine Stewart.
Those will make ur hubby feel better - they are so comfortable with who they are.
was very nice to hear you mention my grandfather Bill Ballew at Prog. Forum last night. Loved your talk!
*~just watched da talent show shit was gud n hilarious...~*
Damn das true.
For the first time, I now have a red bellied woodpecker visiting my suet feeder! So, tell me why they don't have red bellies. ???
Last day of the Con, have tons o footage coming your way. Stay Tuned
have you looked at 's work on fakesters in MySpace? Good stuff.
Please stop by the Sherman Oaks Farmers' Market this afternoon starting at 3 pm!
I'm tired wtf I almost said I'm tires uhggg
Life is a foreign language; all men mispronounce it.
Hahaha got to love haters<3:P
Atlanta - March 2nd - 4th need females for Power Shoot. You will be submitted for music videos for JayZ, Lil Wayne, Rick Ross and many more
I assume you're south of me cause I'm not familiar with that name...
Saying, "Thats crazy!" ... when you haven’t been listening to someone.
man-up, quit blaming things on your mama. Smh
I've got a very "parasocial" website concept I would love to share with you... :)
I just watch u blow $2000 on rental cars in 3 weeks..u got some nerve askin me for a ride..lol bitch im in africa
Woot!! Keep going!!! RT : Passed the 49k mark! I'm so close, I almost can't believe it.
#4famouswords we need to talk
I miss walking through Sherman Park
Falling asleep. Can't.Keep.My.Eyes.Open.
MVC3 looking great i cant wait
You know calculus? Ah, I knew you would catch me on that, your mother will teach you calculus...
Bad romance is like my theme song right now
way better approach than my "hide him from the brothers" approach I've taken my entire life...such an #innovator, Mere!
working on a bunch of new horror projects including one i'm hoping will tickle your fancies...
#WellSaid & #WellDone yesterday on There's a multitude of ways to describe players doin good/bad.
Unfortunately no Coronas for me haha Enjoy KY! RT : yay! Congrats. I hope you're celebrating with a Corona :)”
check ur email, i set up a new time of 11:20/7:20 and gave you a UK# to call. hope that helps.
It's really not what happens to you but how you respond. Amazed at how fast God works when I hold up my end of the bargain.
You're very welcome! Love what you guys are doing, keep it up!
Wen I go to mi prom i want to go wit 2 chicks #At da same dam tyme
where are you
RT : Michael Perez not returning to UTEP next year. Too bad. Wish him the best.
I have NOEL fever!!
who fought
Wow...relaxing now...It was a wonderful weekend.
advocates peer review as a way to place a work in a scholarly ecosystem rather than as a gatekeeper
the answer is yes to many of the patsy "fall guy" people who were deemed responsible for the deaths of the "influentials"..
not bad I'm a a big panik fan ... Wasn't rashaun Dixon drafted in 08?
Aloha Peter, Can we connect for tropical flower sales from Hawaii?
Not really.
when do you get back?!
JSB: "What would grant challenges look like if set forth by American Academy of Arts & Sciences?" Need both HUMA & STEM
text me il explain
Bon Iver is a well-deserved Grammy winner and amen for him giving Eau Claire, WI a shout out!
I guarantee your gut feeling isn't all your own.
sleep what 4 hours a night?
lol, she is so annoying. Have some respect for the other teams, the other coaches do.
agreed!!! The boys in my school are ick!
well fine bitch. (but no really, I hope you have fun I didn't know you were doing that)
Don't go see J Edgar. While it is a good portrayal of the creation of the FBI..
Don't put it off. It was really good.
Happy weekend and TYVM! luv new follows
I'm like a little kid I'm so dam picky about what food I eat
got mad hoes on her dick
Things gotta move.
You'll get what you deserve: A broken heart. A broken heart you can't mend.
Need to make a new playlist to bump.
beat me with my own balloon. in the face. rude.
Excited to go!!!
It's my birthday today. Spending it with some friends and my dogs. Life at 55 is still good.
Amazing description of winter and what we miss when it's warm instead on A Prairie Home Companion today.
Batman is a douche
cool thanks, say hi to Bri
'Dream House' with Daniel Craig and Rachel Weisz is a good example of why I love $3 theaters.
I miss my bebes
Regret is the worst feeling in the world....
I was at the store the kiosk said someone in Washington one the biggest Lotto in history. I haven't checked my tickets and won't till tm.
Nothing hurts more than being disappointed by the single person u thought whould never hurt u
- We should have Women's teams affiliated with the MLS teams...
HILARIOUS! RT #DescribeUrExUsingOnlyMovieTitles - A Series of Unfortunate Events
This is the strangest walk I have had on K Street in a long time...and that says a lot. Is there a full moon out tonight?
happy almost birthday, Lou!
I'm in Milwaukee tonight. is in Milwaukee tonight. WHAT?!
lmao they kept trinna sell that shit to my mom
Calia called to stand and sworn in.
dude im loving it
disproportionate to the amount of time devoted to specific artistic endeavors or interventions into museum galleries/operas.
Not sure about going to the salon for a #spraytan? We do mobile visits! We’ll bring that golden glow to you! ;)
I feel like at the end of this, we'll all just be dubious.
official meeting of the long valley track club elite squad
Then no football tomorrow
It is dangerous to hunt animals because many hunters get shot by other hunters. Some hunters shoot anything that moves.
Welcome to the Twitterverse
and I created some havoc last night
On my way to class. Traffic. Obviously, not many people are off today. Are there any holidays that we still hold sacred in this country?
thanks! Back at ya!
I like your banner and if I were in need of a banner and had the scratch, I'd hire you to make me a banner.
it seems like your throttling me. Why is my 3G so slow?
It needs to be followed up by "Thanks. I stuffed it myself."
cat babies are better than real babies.
America's debt is a menace because the rich are told that it is okay to make their club an exclusive one by selfish/unpatriotic politicians!
Waking up before your alarm <<<<<<
Hello! #Oprahslifeclass mates
Y'know what soundtrack goes great with painting and home improvements? Tron Legacy. Daft Punk, man. They're awesome.
gonna be tweeting a LOT about tomorrow. just be warned haha... my baby's gonna be 18! <3
“: here's to the kids who are too awkward to function.” Big Cat from Fantasy Factory ;P 's brother. <3 :)
Breaks over! Comic Con prep in full force! Who needs a booth???
RT Rick Perry, king of the wild frontier. txmnth.ly/pbgZOY (context)
Hm stereo live tonight?
Jamison has also worked with local crews on her shoot locations, which she finds makes the film even more about the people in the country
All the world, every past & future, is reflected in a raindrop, falling ever free, then suddenly shattered by fate, in shocking silence.
Watch out we are growing Big...this month 500 users active
what's a lens cap? Isn't that what UV/haze filters are for?
Nice! I'm sure the print will look great. I love this canvas.
Lots of work yet to do, have a productive evening where ever you maybe. We are striving to help as many people as we can! more in a bit...
On my way home. What's everyone up to?
Have a fun and safe trip!
YAY i remembered my twitter password ! HAY GUISE (;
Happy Greek Easter!!
well yeah, but I'm talking strictly career performance days. Hamilton trades to Pujols in a heartbeat.
Yes, a few times over the years. Never on a nightly basis though. ;)
i'm about to buy some Khaki Cordarounds... if I love them can I come to san fran and have you sign them ??
Can't sleep without andy's voice :( I need my STWOF cd now <3
I KNOW :D
thanks for the follow! Looking forward to your tweets!
Nathan's in elk grove. Regent In pocket fuji on Freeport. New lei wah on Freeport
of course bro you fuckin wit it or you goin b4 that ?
Wait... are you into Doctor Who? Did I know this?
Things are going good. I always start tri season with a wicked cold. This was no different. :)
it was incredible today! Glad you got a walk in with the hound - we ended up at Tashmoo for sunset. Enjoy the night...
This place is falling apart!
funny I thought of you today. How are you?
Ugh so true. I was personally aiming for a tragic ending...I just wanted an epic & complete tragic ending.
Hey kiddos--have a great last day of school before Vacation Week! Are you doing anything fun?
U a dummy
Wow, very cool looking live demo. Well done by working a biz plan #s into it as well.
Rumor there were no seats for the band, but again, not certain RT Not certain, but I believe so, yes.
Seriously the women in the #DWTS live studio audience may riot if William Levy doesn't take his shirt off!
Wanna be innit?? :)
Baltimore was 3rd highest in Winter Classic ratings. :)
I'm home, but not yet for good. Have a month and a bit left
Treat yourself at Tipsy Salon & Spa and earn 20% #cashback with your purchase of $60 or more! That's a
good luck #vineyardvines with the #hingham #derbystreet opening, so excited for all of you!
thenn we gots to have a chat soon then :)
Thank you !! Happy #FF!
& they sweet !!
yes definitely!
lol #STL is hotter than #Jaipur right now. okay, so it's midnight there and noon here, but still... #STL is burning up.
I'm reading a physical newspaper. Like, printed on paper. Just thought you should know.
do tell
Lets see if the knicks can break the 70 point barrier tonite
im am wasting 30 bucks for a one day thing!
lol no hope for them now barely had hope with rose
Export to H.264 native, no encode, and import into prog
RT Started the day with best cup of coffee ever. delishhhh
Shake that ass on the floor call that shit a ass quake
wow, lots of new followers- i promised if you follow me i will in return follow you.. shout outs coming soon...
Time to Clean -____-....but its always better when i jam out to <33
Yeah... must have been steroids.
The 80's called. Wrong number...
Got kicked out of parking complex for skateboarding with some friends.
I've avoided Twilight stuff on purpose. Maybe should pan this one as well.
There is nothing like your MOM...she will always be there for you..GOD BLESS MY MOM!!!
"Exercise produces a relaxation response that serves as a positive distraction, it also helps elevate your mood and keep depression at bay."
I just finished a 2.65 mi run with a time of 30:33 with Nike+ GPS.
Someone wanted $2 million from David Letterman not to go public about sexual relationships with women who worked on his show. Too late now.
here I will just say good luck
It's been a while since I've given Dana the #ff love that she deserves. She's funny, smart, and beautiful!
rotbl!! U already know! #aivilOs our tugging comes naturally!!
; not to mention the food sucks.
ACUI Idol and Rhythmic Gaming spots avail 4 region 9
And whatdya want? At least it's not a pun.
BAD NEWS! The lights have died. It's either a bad joke, or God telling us to stop actin' a fool.
Hope it did the trick!
Loving the Linsanity !!!
Sweet summer time ! Hit me up when your free !
I really hate waitin on trev to get off work
Tall Geese!
good design is good business and good UX is good marketing
It sure is!
We have Empanadas today! Chicken or cheese. Hope to see you for lunch.
When the rate of change outside the company exceeds the rate of change inside the company-the end is near. Joe Grimaldi rocks.
Tonight at 7:30 being interviewed by Sarah Cahill on along with Nathan Davis for Monday's SFCMP concert
Love my room freezing just to have an excuse to get closer
well where ATL is playing is like 2hours and 30 mins away from where we live and we dont have license:(
Where ignorance is our master, there is no possibility of real peace. - Dalai Lama
Come on Ed carpenter
#ff HUGE thanks your support You ROCK! ☺
I don't see what the big deal is about hunger games....
But sloppy is sloppy.. Floors,walls, but never the girls.
Where all the cute/fly dudes at.... These dudes be lame... Some lame ass fuck
Anyone from Seattle stuck in Dallas this a-m or were U there 2 witness #Dallas #Tornado s ? Gimme a call if you're up 4 talkin' 206.404.4145
I now have moves like jagger stuck I'm my head!! Thanks Cc:
"So then, those who suffer according to God’s will should commit themselves to their faithful Creator & continue to do good." -1 Peter 4:19
is coming to town tomorrow for a quick weekend.
#DearMen Our woman are waiting on us to lead and love the right way.
Conrad's Crab on Joppa rd are money!!!!
If it works for Special Ops, then it should work for art history, which is less dangerous & less crucial to nat'l security most of the time
It’s my business to do God’s Business, and it’s His Business to take care of my business.
HORRIBLE SERVICE! My husband ordered flowers for his mother on Mother's Day&they were never delivered.
Kenny Ozzfest 4 will now be held at Mayday Northside Dec. 3. We'll be there, so should you!
he needs proactive in his life...
Tues night (Jan.11) at 8, 9, and 10pm on PBS, check out 3 specials on #Haiti: Deadliest Earthquakes, Battle for Haiti, Children of Haiti.
lol stop being disrespectful
after seeing that I can kinda understand where DoD is coming from. No doubt those are the guys pushing the Amero.
CNN is saying that the GOP have a "media bkaming' problem. I just have a problem with CNN period.!!!!!! Go to hell MSM!!!!!!!
people who say whatev or whatevs, will never be
As I type this tweet on my MacBook I think how Steve Jobs impacted my life. I counted on his vision & feel the loss of him in a personal way
#WhyDoIAlways want to be like anyone else
--BiTCHED THREAT WiT DAT CHiT CHATiN.!!
Just got started at #tocchicago listening to digital transitions from print
Still getting my main logo redone or tweaked... it's just not right yet
at the breweries it is anyway. by that logic the fall brews will be out shortly after july 4.
S/O from the CEO's of Ganksta Enterprize Black Gotti and THE GOD
What is more surprising than Obama openly supporting same sex marriage is Romney assuming he can win while opposing it.
: lots of possible tasks that all count as "contributing" to #kohails. answer q, write docs, code, sponsor code,etc
Blake Griffin just shoved Gasol in the back. That is a travesty.
Haha! Haven't checked emails yet. Too busy trying to pull out a #RespectTip instead ;)
We are never horribly loud and obnoxious. Ever. ;)
I'm the Rodney Dangerfield of radio. Ha! RT :
What a waste!!!
- yes. Share drives are folders on the network. connect.sf.edu is the web-based intranet.
877- cash now
2 of the many great things I can do now it's Easter holidays listen to as loud as I want😜 and watch TBP videos over'n'over😉
saw you take down that guy who rushed the governor... sexy beast you. You were on your A game last night
I dont even know if I like yuh anymore .. ?
You see orange sky 'cause nuclear particles brought by the jet stream winds from Fukushima & TN's nuclear power leakage.
nah dude...thanks for helping me out with my music and sharing yours, Curtis in Montana
That sculpture is so ugly.
Rewrite complete! Should be it for that screenplay.
It's my birthday day at school :)
haha but he was just talking smack on you two weeks ago lol okay !
I wish I was a better friend .
Maybe this world is another planets hell
get ready : "S/O to for the interview tonight. Look out for more things from both of us."
What are some good new song out??
what did cascade do...?
Happy Birthday, Roma! You don't look a day over 2, 760.
I used to be an adventurer like you. Then I took an arrow to the knee...
Rachael is scary when she cries
Looking forward to introducing to tomorrow. Followed by Mexican food, naturally.
“Learn from yesterday, live for today, hope for tomorrow. The important thing is not to stop questioning.” -Albert Einstein. HAVE A G'DAY!!
yea same here! It like kills you inside!
K cool
"Before starting work, go thru all former materials. Many things of vital importance have been lost sight of." Note for "Sun and Rocks" 2/2
had a lovely time makeup shopping with :)
IPRC alert .40 short term goal
Finding Detroit to be the most interesting place in America right now.
Did you hear back from Civic?
hmm i wonder why people just leave me sometimes. i didn't know i made your life bad.
The Quiznos where I live won't take my FREE SUB coupon! Cheap bastards!
#inaghettohouse you don't talk back to your mom cause she'll beat your ass
Thank you to everyone for attending the 14th Annual Irish Stroll! The BPD, Baltimore Station and all of our partners Thank U too!
is finally tweeting <3
Good to see NC State getting some love on today. interviews with and Bobby Mack
i cannot wait to meet you at teen hoot<3(:
I'm a heat fan. I just need the Bulls to lose.
Newsflash for mitt romney: FEW of us who Elected President Obama are "disappointed in him", He isn't perfect, but we DO want to KEEP him!!
It's early days but do you know anyone who is driving over to #sasquatch on Sunday morning? I'd love to catch a ride and help pay for gas :)
Apparently he was in NO & after Katrina went to Durham. He told me all about it. Very, very nice.
Mitch has been in her room! I'm good to go! And Anna had a nice haircut. Matt you like that!
I wonder what kinda music he gon drop.... Mafioso R&B?
you've got that right!
Always a blast; and hubby can really rock!
I really do hate people though.
I'm at the 5 mile mark to cheer, and I'll ride back to the finish once she passes.
Gary is irritable today. And fuck the third person.
What a fucking terrible day. And It's barely just started.
Thanks! I'm partial to RogersTHAT too!
Come in for a classic Dark & Stormy cocktail on this dark and rainy night. We make ours with Cruzan's Black Strap rum and ginger beer
I am the best you've ever had!
I need ideas for dinner.
Out done my record for running up and down stairs at gov
miles away.
have you gone to the beach all summer ?
OK,then.
My lack of self discipline is strictly limited to 10am-2pm daily.
I wish I still had a 4 letter word
all over the place lol
People are too sensitive, to the point that being afraid of offending someone is crippling productivity and new thought.
I'm so strong! I threw a baseball and broke my girlfriend's hand. No more hand jobs for me. #EGOBOOST +1
tanks for the follow
missed Hightower pick was out looking at cars...
“: Writin my record for all u animals” Can't wait!!
when will we be getting lunch?
►ℱ▒σ▒ℓ▒ℓ▒σ▒ω ✰✰ •••••>So if life has twist were is the straight way to success? Believing in yourself is the way to straight success.
Aww you want me dead? That means you care I exist (:
you guys did awesome in Stamford :)<3333
Jack White?!? That's fucking racist.
I'm the new cancer, never looked better and you can't stand it~ #flashbackfriday. Reminds me of in the jeep.
My good friend is a grand maestro. and one of his pop songs was just on TV.
Goodbye résumé, hello social networking.
Don't get mad because your favorite player can't hang with Lebron
RT : #umediacenter Films from the Vaults today OUGL. No popcorn but lots Eastman Ektachrome film. Sesshu Toyo currently scrolling.
We got the Ex and Richbaba (mine). Not all are in stock so don't fall totally in love w one till you check
I rely on a soundtrack of waterfalls. It makes a great white noise. But sometimes I have to resort to soft foam earplugs.
Research and Markets: OECD Report - Literacy, Numeracy and Problem Solving in Technology-Rich Environments Framework ...
beautiful. Disappointment from the start. Had high expectations for him. I wish him the best...and to stay away from Osi
Afternoon #realrnb is right here: >>> what are you wanting for? click that follow button our goal is 120k let's get it!
#AutismAwareness month is over but #AutismAwareness should not just be one month a year it should be year round
On a happy note, it's a splendiferous morning on #CapHillDC! Sunny, crisp, & cool... perfect!!
"So" is a real word stop correcting it to "do"
#RaleyField is a lil slice of Americana. Nothing like 9 innings, a dog and a beer in
Signing copies of my book, Grey Eminence, at Fort Belvoir this weekend. Now I just need customers.
Dad's retirement dinner!
and ps if you aren't watching ice loves coco right now...imma need you to out it on asap. Please and thank you.
Tonight, our singers help pay tribute to this year's honorees at the Honors. The show will air on 12/27 at 9 p.m.
Idk where the hell i was then. Ha
Milwaukee weather peaks and everyone walking on the street is your new best friend.
I swear im just too cool... that's why im in #TeamCORAHN , #WeirdoGang ,and
go Rams!
Christmas isn't the same..
Finally getting some rest today what a whirl wind of shows and lectures last week. it all starts over again in a couple of days!
Nice. I'd love to see a Library-wide signage type project. (BTW, we'd have to pay this guy, obviously)
Aw! Yellowbrickroad is streaming on netflix now too. Crazyville.
's manager was on 101.5's food porn. it was really funny. Lady La won! again!!!!!
Enjoying Newt being down in Georgia?
had a great sandwich yesterday that is absolutely going on the menu
We're #22 on the charts! Thanks for helping!!
We are working on a website for HelpALibrarian to make it easier to submit questions to the group. It should be ready in Sept!
he saw a pig fly RT : im bout to completely cut drugs and drinking out of my life... officially
Follow me I love fitness; I am the princess of swim & gym!! And I started Julie Berman on "GH" was her agent
Wow! Thanks for the great list of WWP Seminars. And for the #nitlesym tweets.
Officially addicted to RedBull. I can't seem to make it through the day without one (it's a nap in a can).
On my way to HQ in Boston for National Executive Leadership Conference. Looking forward to seeing friends from our network.
Enthusiasm is contagious. Why not start an epidemic?
I warned our bartender friend to prepare for the apocalypse on Saturday
On vacation in Florida. Told kids that news said beach was closed because of oil spill. "sounds like April Fools" they said.
The uproar about Starbucks' use of bug-based food coloring is baseless. If you regularly drink Starbucks coffee you deserve to drink bugs.
you mean she ordered a BLT (bacon, lettuce and tomatoe) sandwich with Mayo?! Smh...crazy old lady
The baseball team is back on campus after its trip home from the Marion, Ind., win. Two days off then prep for NAIA World Series starts Wed.
I don't get the reference... but I dig the song. I listened to the whole thing. I think I'm going to keep it.
Second only to your #Badgers, right?!
Tom needs to make a twitter.
you're hilarious! <3
My brother's gas in this heated car with the windows up<<<<<
i hate when commercials get randomly louder then the show your watching.
Graphic designers??? Send info
Make sure to Retweet our #PhillyHunt tweets because more followers means bigger and better prizes.
RT For the girls that can't just mess with a guy but have to try to talk to every single one of them, get a life.
<---- THIS UGLY ASS NIGGA UNFOLLOWED ME!
How does a play by play guy make the wrong call twice.. After a time out.. Smh
It's 80 degrees. Thunderstorms are bearing down on Milwaukee. My wife is cooking a turkey.
dude really, more snow? come on.
Thanks for the RT Lisa! Hope to see you there! :)
Need a bite to eat while studying, stop by the Robot Cafe. It will be closing at 10 pm today through Thursday!
You were hilarious at the Oscars! Loved your opening number. You are so talented and professional. Please come back again!
WTF JEREMY LIN 38 POINTS AGAINST THE LAKERS!! #LINSANITY #NBA (got off set late today, just saw the news!) ASIAN AMERICAN REPRESENT!
Interesting content to be found:
How did you get that Fells fumble? Thank you, you are da Man! That changed the game!
Your life problems are HALARIOUS.
Thanks to and for the t-shirt RT love!
Here's two blog posts where I ream people who disagree that the best strategy in RPS ends in a tie
RT Next one who calls my CD "Fast & FURIOUS" is gettin' a knuckle sandwich. @ SubCentric Smith Releases ‘Fast & Furious’
well daaammmnnn... We need to hang soon!!
and 1% stupid.
At 3:00 am Wednesday morning, an armed group of criminals broke into a house in the town of Cerralvo, Nuevo LeA3n.
3000+ friends on Twitter, that's awesome!!
She was very excited to finally fit into that top!
I Hope This Summer Be Fun
just go to the FB page and keep requesting me or any other of your favorite's and let your friends do the same..
Recognize. Explore. Adopt. Live The Real Change Project
no you didnt
Krump to the Red Sea, melt down the golden calf, drink it, krump, be doomed to krump through the desert for forty years
wish I could have attended that today, get my mobile on. oh well, one of my friends decided to have their wedding today.
#FF continued! Check them out->
home I'm dome for the day.
Break legs, kick ass, and have fun! #RABBITS Miss you tons.
I took my vitamins drank my protein and im headed to the gym for the first time in two years smh 👍
lucky you .... its 45F and rainy here :[
do you ever eat breakfast?
Bout check out again headache ):
Alexa Blair I love you! Hope your'e having fun in London town :)
Psyched to with today. First day with new client. Leaders in customer experience management.
aah, right-o. Thanks. Have a good one!
A Termite walked into a pub and asked, "Where's the bar tender?"
I just want to apologize to all my mates I've been chatting up recently! I over use LOL and it's ruining relationships I feel! ;-p lol...
I'm v proud of today! Remember: only 5 days till KO!!!
HOMER BAILEY * clap, clap, clap clap clap*
Sarcasm is just one more service I offer.
So many months again I was watching The Biggest Loser and it woke me up! I'm enjoying the fact that I've lost more than the most of them! :)
Nice! But I prefer to listen to Supreme Court via
That happened to me just the other day.
I love this Natalie Cole movie 😁👍
Thanks to staff for Jaida's great welcome. She is still commenting on the "niceness" of the staff!
Let's make it sooner than later We must plot something awesome to do!
Don't fix something that's not broken
Our prayers go out to our fearless leader who is going into emergency surgery within the hour to fix a detached retina.
That's fine. Your point is well taken by all 5 viewers.
Chris Bosio Jersey? :)
LSU fan suing Alabama fan for acts after BCS National ...
I think mcnabb and his coach r going to get fired.
Thanks for the follow. Your site is cool!
RT : I'll take care of you.
Some bitches don't know how to text back
I found that joke hilarious! xDDD": Mohr: "The Boston #Bruins apparently are delicious." #NHLAwards"
btw my Italian grandmother called it ALL macaroni: spaghetti, ziti, capellini, whatever. Never used the word pasta.
Anyone have suggestions? RT Know of any home decor store sales? I'm hunting for a new comforter set
It sold out so fast! I emailed my coworkers 30 minutes before and we managed to get 14 people registered.
More rain ☔ in Houston!!! Wonderful!! At least my garden gets water!!
Get into the groove
Thanks so much! Good weekend to you. RT
Summer Side Show is this weekend, hope to see everybody out there <3
Streets are peaceful yet the freeway is a mess?
haha sounds like my school books back in high school heck even now lol. teachers always have to give us boring things
Friday is #thriftstore day. Love
90% of Internet users in chile use Facebook, along with 89% in Argentina Peru and Venezuela
ALL the pastels
Large Pirate Beach Party Balls Great for Parties! | the beach toys
That's my No. 2, and just barely, too.
haha that was a fun ass class! was always making videos of us acting stupid.
Never ever ever fly American airlines. Ever.
i got mexicans that a push ya wig bak nigga
Game 162 of last year on ESPN2 right now. As an #orioles fan, this is sadly one of the happiest moments of the last 14 years.
Hell yea working on followers already have 82 from the 13 i had this morning
not at all,critical thinking is a slow progress though, i fear sheltering my kids and then opening flood gates will b worse
Let's go lions we out here saints fans!
Lil brother came up to me and asked me to give him some "gangsta" music... So proud
Bout to go get a fresh fade doe!!!
Y'all not gonna start. It's too early to be ROFL and SMH! It's not even noon yet!
Congrats! She's beautiful!!
awe ok :) I though u were upset. I wasnt sure if u was or not.
#ForeverJealous of the girl that danced withh Jason.
I love, love, love the smell of the beach and suntan lotion!! I need a beach day SOON!!
Good to see our colleagues from , , , and at Library Day in Albany -- being heard!
looks like fun! I'll be following from afar
I have heard of them. Good idea though :D
Look at you and all your little followers....and you said you would never get on twitter ;)
Not much preparation doesn't sound like lol.
Thanks to our new followers , and We're excited to share news and fun stories with you in 2012!
i feel like slaying some monkeys or something
It's morning! Well sort of, it's nearly 12pm and I just woke up. Hahah, have a great day guys(:
i love fenway park tell that mlb network to reair that show
just finished my pretzels :( and 2lazy to get up 2 get more LOL!!!
Cats fed, coffee in hand.
I'm messing with you..look at it this way....no matter who ya pick, you aint beating my Falcons, hahahaha
Love that song!!
Getting nails done. (Y)
#tooready teach me how to be a Hautian!
What was Anthony Davis? Haven't forgotten him already?
What are your store hours on Easter Sunday?
Nashville trench lawyer menu. Probation violation hearing and a plea is on tap today.
most definitely!
We've moved our networking event back one week to accommodate some other events going on in our city. Make sure you are there 5/14!
Of course! Why wouldn't you?
Imma watch that show. You keep singing praises.
Everyone knows the best way to create jobs is with this Starbucks bracelet.
Love leaves a memory that no one can steal ; But it also leaves a scar that no one can heal ♥.
Radiohead disc box treasure hunt and other cool prizes at the Other Lives instore on Monday at Amoeba Hollywood. Details soon!
I am staying in PDX; looks like travel is a part of the equation. I am planning to spend some time working from SF area soon.
wow, ur unbelievable
Just now caught up with #Alcatraz - LOVE IT! JJ Abrams, may I write for you for free??? :)
People on Facebook are like mosquitoes. The only descriptive word I can think of for them is the word annoying.
HEY I JUST MET YOU, AND THIS IS CRAZY BUT HERES MY NUMBER. SO CALL ME MAYBE.
you know you broke the record for most views in 24-hours right ? (: yay
tanks God. Or else you'd Unfollow me. Ps u owe me coffee.
Uh oh my brother has finally made it to twitter
Omg I can't wait until drops this album its gonna be fye. I wonder is he coming to Milwaukee I would just love dat. :)
im good love..jus chillen and playin 2k12 right now. i really want to meet you in person some day, its a serious must!!! lol
they are doing it for Chipper Jones too! Idiots
Congratulations! That's wonderful and very well deserved.
nothing. Just bored. Talking to you know who (;
Watch my student Bobby Ray Cauley, Jr on #breakoutkings this Sunday on A&E as "Young Ronnie". This is his first TV show!!!
Heart the !
holy hell!! why wasn't i following you here?
LOL love you too boy
Prom season is around the corner and the buses are going fast. Don't miss out on our special, which includes dinner with the 10 hour package
could i get a follow for my birthday?<3
Sounds awesome if I can get away from serving Ice Cream down the street I will give it a try. Come on by 4 a scoop sometime
Seriously? That ticks me off. I don't know you as a prof but your visibility alone is worth a whole lot.
Thank you Stephen! He donated $10, he's a real Fun Friend!
Young children's injuries in the home result in approx 2500 deaths/yr = real value to home safety proofing
Travel back safe all of our AU friends! We will see you tomorrow!
haha totally saw that. I don't think I would have gone for the grilled cheese either...
Industry folk, 25% off your entire check this evening, good in the lounge or in the dining room! Let us pamper you on your day off!
All of the lights.
yeeesss! High five 🙏
Always seeing UT articles about something going on in my neighborhood in Pacific Beach. Today it was trash bags of marijuana in dumpsters...
Long day coming !
“: Dark skin niggas play "DDR" Dance Dance Revolution” umm okay. Haven't played in years though. Hahahaha
please don't ever again let me read the words, "pre-scheduled twitter e-blasts" in a professional context
Save the Date: April 21... Edge Model Opening Party. We are very excited as the riverfront condo building starts to really develop!
Hi! :D I wanna talk to you!! I miss yew. x3 But I only have 10 mins before school starts.
Hot as shit
what grade are you in?
Badgers impress fans | But not the AP voters | Flying sub-radar | http:BadgerHaiku.com
the Rise As One stuff on Nike BB is my squad. Been a great run, very intense but very fun!
What do you like in your tacos? Smoked Pulled Chicken? Kobe Beef? Grilled Tuna? IT'S TACO TUESDAY, try our tacos for half price today!
I hope the wk. is off to a great start!!
RT The next person who mentions Kristen Bell and sloths gets smacked.
so a pirate walks into a bar...
Follow me !(;
Awesome weather today. What to.....bike ride or golf? Have to enjoy it when its here.
How to recycle Women's Suits: www.dressforsuccess.org/sandiego... Check out the web site for more details! Or call:619.281.3373 :)
I don't like the tweets about hail in #indy. I'm going to go drape my body over as much of my car as possible
can I get a retweet from the best band ever?
One of the students asked me how much money there is in writing and nonprofit work. Little, I told him. I was followed by Denise Whiting.
“: Taylor swift music >>>” and I go hard to this
My wife is coloring my daughter's hair...again. God help us.
Ooh, intriguing. Are you thinking active scheduling (Doodle poll-style), or posting a schedule?
rad! much appreciated!
Thank you God for another great day I pray I would Go Hard 4 U everyday and shine my light for you and you would get all the glory and honor
Change of schedule.
What are the odds?!
Is it just me or is Twitter Buggin cause I can't Tweet Da Right way.
Heading put on a jet plane don't know when we'll be back again... #Tampa xoxo
My kids, younger than 8th grade, are in touch with reality and they know that a woman's right to liberty are inevitable.
thanks for the FollowFriday love! Right back at you!
. test presses in the house! sounds so smooth
Oh no, we've lost Jeff to the darkside!
Cause you had a bad day You're taking one down You sing a sad song just to turn it around
Why is it so hard to throw away rubber bands?
Watching Poetic Justice on #BET. Such a classic!!!! Janet Jackson had the fresh braids lmao. Would definitely eat her braids for breakfast!
Booyah is coming off the line this morning! Miller Park has picked it up for their Craft Beer Kiosks this summer along with Louie's!
Heading out to a Promo. Already smashed and 30 minutes late. That's what you get for asking me to do a Friday night promotion.
Learning about the stimulus pkg and nonprofits
Just popped down
thanks for keeping us in mind. Hope to talk more soon.
stop by tomorrow for a sneak peek of the new STITCH-EQ Black/White by #MIKELPATRIK!
Oh Yeah, so many of these.
Tutorials, photoshop and more - How To Find A Reliable Web ...
RT. Happy New Year to everyone!;)♥
Try Fireman Ale sir.
RT : Following you, LIKE'd the Beast page and already checked out some products! awesome stuff!!- thanks! :)
Using an infrared-based camera, the Kinect system will automatically lock on to the players as soon as they enter the sensor area.
I wouldn't even fight that bitch just slap her with my 22 inch weave
What up Homie
turns out: vanilla almond milk tastes awesome! who knew?
With music it was “it’s too expensive” or “I wouldn’t have bought it anyway”. I wouldn’t expect HBO to break even offering DLs.
road trip down south with C and B! #R&R
I'll give 'em a try!
Japanese will be the death of me -__-
Never let your enemies place fear in you. The worst that can happen is you lose. However, that means you can start right back fighting.
Met author AGS Johnson today. Lovely woman and talented author! Great breakfast chat.
now playing : - ya man ain't me :)
#prsagaconf Jeremy Baka's talk on unleashing creativity began by speaking ill of the dead and just got better from there
Watching jersey shore !!
when did you see it? I only saw once.
i watched the first two eps and then quit. i'm amazed that it got another season.
I hope she comes on.. i have to go get my hair cut.. i been looking tragic for way to long..
Watching the story of Marlie and her new face. Marlie, God Bless you sweethheart. What a strong kid.
Target: lovely clothes, shame about their 'no fatties' policy. :(
Cheating is easy. Try to do something more challenging.. like being Faithful.
We don't reach Mathis on our 4G wireless network, but we do offer a Nationwide plan that will reach Mathis. It's called 4G+Mobile.
I'm pullin an all nighter with , everybody be nice and tweet for everybody to follow mee:)
#SOTU I am so ready for this. better listen well.
Supporting the holistic health community and promoting pathways to wellness
Selish move by Rondo. Who chest bumps a ref? Com'on son!
I love how people changed their twitter name to Vegemite, yet Niall hated Vegemite.
dishwasher safe... Other than that, your world!
Matthew Trump~ Diplomacy is the art of knowing what not to say.
It's San Diego night at Taproom No. 307!
It's nice to be back online! Internet was off at our house since Saturday morning. It was simultaneously a productivity enhancer and killer.
The final spot was dope, loved the wall paper, and the shoe wall was ill.
On set with doing video with the awesome staff of Evergreen Heating & AC.
Damn. I read that he has 3 kids.
well i still bet u got that sexy momma to be glow!! what are u having?
when will you be in ATX?
Love to ALL moms! RT: "A mother holds her children's hands 4 a short while... but their hearts forever." -Unknown
thank you! He made it!!
#thevoice should be crazy for letting that Juilette Simms sing Crazy by Ceelo...She sound Crazy
Yay today is the last day of march lol march was the longest month of my life lol
No plans for #Easter Sunday? Join us for an a la carte brunch w/ specials including Prime Rib, Lamb Benny and Tuna Nicoise Dial 303.312.3107
How long the video has to be?
haha thank God for no more dorm life
. guess all that orange is affecting your math skills
RT : What do you think you should be outsourcing as an entrepreneur? Here are 10 things from -...
Laying down a new track!
Happy Valentine's Day baby!! ;-)
Hey followers, in case you missed it, my BFF is officially tweeting. Follow her ass or else.
if I did that then it wouldn't be a brain teaser.
": incredibly ill this morning. I need my boyfriend and a glauc STAT." Ill be over nurse u with eggs benny and massages soon babe:)
Thanks for the RT!
Nursing pinning ceremony happening right now in Linehan. Woots heard throughout GAC!
Results are in from GiveBIG! Over $16,000 raised to help support the arts in Puget Sound! Thank you to all our donors and !
Real gym rats/workers r like assasins...always moving in silence. No need to broadcast the work being done...it's revealed on game day.
yo when people talk during a movie i wanna punch them in the face
May 20th Show wit Waka, May 25th Show/videoshoot performance wit Alley Boy & Trouble, July 6th Show wit Plies! WE WORKIN!
I forgot RT : getting Beltran was genius...they're not missing a beat without...ah... what's his name?
Watching Kevin Na waggle, back off, yell at himself, waggle some more, swing over ball in anger, then stripe one... Strangely entertaining.
have to continue la winning streak
- you GOTTA use a citicard? or can you just use the passcode?
Character is made by what you stand for; reputation, by what you fall for. (Robert Quillen)
I've heard people say, "Love hate Love hate, it doesn't matter!" Anyway, happy 16th birthday, Nick!
Yay, My friend, Amber Camarillo Made. A Twitter account!. Clap, or whatever! . IDK! ? 3 CHEERS FOR AMBER! .. ^^
This Why I Aint TAKEN, Imma Be Single Forever &&' Thats a fact...
I wish. Today it was 103 here. I miss the cold. Lol
weird, I walk past Neptune daily and the poster says War on Drugs will be there, but Internet says you're right/I'm wrong
Almost every talk I've attended at #railsconf has pitched Postgres... Might be something to it
That chick with pink hair
Looking forward to it. Really got a lot out of bouncing around ideas. last year.
Relaxing ass day. #keys 😏
I'm seriously not talking to ever.
Watch it now, don't let the n-word hit you upside the head. Keep your distance from the abusers of this STILL negative & dehumanizing word!
Hello to you too!! Join our fab fb page and give us a call..we'd LOVE to chat with you. Choices are endless..BE CHOOSEY!
I see you are obsessively watching the IC elections just like me. Haha. Love you. Two girls from my region are running! <3
text me now valentine
haha, if it wasn't for the soggy clothes I'd be great. It's better than walking that long in 105f though :)
Tired of fighting. Just gonna play my game.
OK these Nuggets have got to go..... Kobe Time... Stomach Virus and all.
I'm a fan but then again I own a K. Kloss Clippers jersey.
33 More days until most teams Spring practice. It's a step..
I will miss your americano's while you're gone.
Life throws many curveballs. I have swung and missed on this one. Hopefully I get another chance. If you feel this way, stop and take a look
Lauro on illegitimate reanimation of corpses by giving them purpose ("tool use"): martyr, relic, organ donor, "worm food."
Yo check out out she will by Lil wheezy feat drizzydrake
I definitely need to lay off the coffee, sugar and carbs. My heartburn is back with a vengeance.
Come visit www.Maps4kids.com
I mizz you more!!! *cough cough* come to Boston *cough cough* livi is!
Just like alcohol, we will always have tests. Employers don't want high employees. We don't want high truck drivers, etc.
Remember, sharing is caring ... sharing can change the world
I haven't worn socks or underwear in three days....and I'm LOVIN EVERY MINUTE OF IT! Hippie-hood, here I come
Always someone doing unnecessary bs
Had fun at the party!
Is it against the law for a yogurt place to have the sound on for the movies they're always playing?
nice to meet you too
will do just about anything for a free t-shirt
wow! Love you too Ash sorry I don't tweet about roaches and mosquitos
Currently writing my cover letter for my ASM interview in a week!!!
Kevin Durant deserved MVP, but Lebron only got it cuz the media be riding his 💩! 😒
Happy Birthday, Cortney!! Have a great day!!!
Every line from Maggie Smith is a pure delight. Yes, finally I get it. Better late than never.
I could go for some Asanka Locals!
Everyone should follow my new #hockey blog:
#sixwords - you mean the world to me
#3importantwords I LOVE YOU
Did they take traveling out the rule book?
The kid: If you don’t watch a movie with me-right now-I’m going to read your diary. Me: It’s blank. The kid: I know. I checked. Movie?
Omg go away stupid bitch
One week till Disney!
Alcatraz come on
In austin for sxsw interactive. Also, tom finley is a pretty darn fine fella.
This what weekends are all about... Hit it twice, its a cool spring day, and it's time grab some lunch. Ahh, this is freetime!
I hate when he sad... i kno when something is wrong with you i knew 4 so many years...jus tell me when something is wrong
I'm finna go to sleep on yo ass
Sweet, thanks!!
Just one more to go! :D
and I love your donna karan dress. way to represent bulgarian women!
Check out the Version by the Killers.
It's official- coffee and I are no longer friends. I need to just learn to get adequate sleep at night in order to stay awake. Tummy dying.
babe you will be my hubby when i turn 21
Despite a tech glitch, had a gr8 discussion about the cultural significance of #GITMO on a politics of representation at
OMG...... I Cant Believe I Just Ate A Huge Cup Of Ice Lemon && Salt(#Angel) My Stomach Hurts
Please Follow my real account at I am switching over today
aye cole
I think may have gone too far with the live tweeting of the Panda insemination. Makes me long for baby pictures
Do we all get our yearbooks today or just seniors?
Why am I awake. WHY.
Oh Hil, headbands? Really? I'm not sure we're still rocking that look.
An acronym for We Owned the Other Team.
I have a joke for that but it's really rude. Even for me.
Foot shoes - WTF? I'm sure there's plenty of Cab drinkers that say that about us lovers of Cru Beaujolais too.
going to see next wednesday at puffabellys in Spring, TX
Angry Beavers :-) taking it back.
Thanks to all who came out for the "Explore Fulton Market" meeting this evening. Looking forward to a great event!
Fingers crossed.
Hey, I had an email that says you're in, so I guess it worked! :-) Thanks for accepting the follow & for following back.
Is it just me or does Emily remind anybody else of Dolly Parton? I hope she busts out with a little 9 to 5.
Idk but you told you were once a "Crazy Horse" kinda girl.
Seriously, does anyone really get stuff done during the day?
phone no, laptop yes, then laptop died :( currently plugging in
Or classy. Do people really do that? And then I can't get an agent. :/
Thanks for the mention!
Cool, 1 more follower away from 800!
Books4teenboys....The Project by Brian caliber
These all sound great! Yay for Amazon--I just ordered all 5. It's looking like a summer of informative reads.
I believe it was John Clay Reeves.
Coming together is a beginning. Keeping together is progress. Working together is success. - Henry Ford << nice one via
"The Shark Tank is not affiliated with the Shark Tank the TV Show"
I agree. That kid is a fool. I think it all starts with Schwartz and trickles down. He's a baby so his players are babies.
Home in New York city, people!
omg, what a great show!!!!!!
Lmfao!!!!!! Poor mosquito... Drinking his blood all lonesome lol
We are on break for 5 minutes and will be reviewing application #130187 - Aaron Steele next.
Protecting the environment!: Deforestation can keep wild animals ...
I'm the one that can keep the promises .
Thanks for the follow, Tim.
trying to get #GiveObamaCreditfor... to trend. see what you can come up with.
Wow! I just got an iPad. What apps do I need?
no way! Ahh I'm so there!!!
First day of summer plans: Go to bed at 9 p.m. Wake up at 3 p.m. I can't wait.
Ok... Starting design process of my indie game.
yes you do! They are out there right now filming before they start the summer tour :)
Are you going to the Apollo tonight? I hope you're feeling better :) Follow back?
I wanna go back to Europe
I just want a motherfuckin cotton candy machine.
Now following who I've been watching on since I was a kid, cause I am a NERD for WEATHER and #hurricane coverage
las vegas looks shocking like morocco, perhaps b/c that's the only desert i've seen before
no its a lie Jimmy!! I got hacked!!
Good morning! Stopping by to say hello and to wish you a great week. Take care.
This is a crazy baseball game! Arkansas 1B played the fool when Matthews called safe. I would have ejected him but I'll just laugh.
students Lev and Tristan take second and third prize at Sphinx Competition! So proud of them and to be part of project step
Priceline Profiting From the Procrastinator: CEO
lol you're just a sassy bitch on twitter so i try to sass back... and fail. #d'oh
Midweek perception check! Remember where you came from, remember how you got where you are now, and remember where your going.
willie mcgee. old cards promo poster. were sent to SI years ago. took from the throwout pile ...
yeah, you should come
Rt : I CATegorically deny pooping in 's seat, for the record. =^..^=
u kno u bored when u look up songs from like 2007
Off to the hell-hole we call school. Yay, stupid teachers and prison food! My favorite!
Just got the new Justin Bieber perfume called SOMEDAY! It smells amazing! I love you J.B!
Actors and entertainment pros who take advantage of social networking can create buzz for themselves. Soon to replace agents.
It sucks when I wanna takk to someone and everyone I know I don't trust
Hey guys. Add me on skype: RodzVieira
It blew chunks until came out then died again when he left.
Because we all love a good deal, right? What's Next DC is offering friends of HubSpot 25% off the registration price
RIP michael jackson !
thanks for the re-add, some of the most gorgeous weddings I have performed at have been at The Peninsula :)
I already am, as the unofficial spokesman.
Morning Kimora!!! Hey lady you Rock!! Have a nice day!!
That nigga tennis coach": I just wanna kno who taught Dirk how to shoot..."
This afternoon, I'll get to join #FutrChat for a second time. Super excited--considering it's about museums!
Did you change your Twitter handle?? PS I MISS YOU!
Just hit 19 hundred followers!! thanks, guys :) much love to you all!!!
maybe if I didn't feel so much like crap! Stupid stomach has a mind of her own. Anyway.. Good morning to you!
happy mothers day wishing you many more great blessings to come all the success to you and all of your loved ones
#FINALSWEEK #BLUES I got As on Midterms IDK how considering I was absent cuz I was @ #SXSW wish I could do that for
Happy to hear that Austin is having a wonderful time in Miami :)
Research: Statistical correlation between success in one field and another
School of Rock in Mythology? Hell yes.
I want you to ride my face so good!
The one thing that would make this trip fantastic would be meeting :)
uuuummmm...where is
There aint enough time in the day to digest all the bullshit and lies yall be feedin me
Thanks for the RTs! :)
“: #ThingsMyBestfriendsDo always think of ways to get us killed, or worse, expelled”
please insert some form of witty comment and pretend I said it
RT : Jojo Simmons RT : Name a artist who put in more work in these streets? #king of ny talk<---'diggy Simmons
"man that harry potter kid is such a jerk, treating apes that way!"
The winds of change are a blowin'.
Potential new office: super cool and bright but needs to be painted, a few things fixed. Sending list of demands with offer in the am...!
Taking My ACT On April 14th, 2012(:
I hate that I can't retweet any of 's tweets!
Ah, I knew I loved Denmark! One of my favorite places!
You've got til midnight tonight to files your taxes!!
I hope that I pass the 7th grade, don't really have a good grade in math, and I need to raise them because when the 18th comes, im done.
You have my attention. ": I love that 's parents in GIRLS are one part Freaks & Geeks and one part Bosom Buddies. "
“: I just realized I'm a lesbian” I'm lesbian too
2012 Council seat in district 13. Who to vote for? Contact me...working with an energetic community involved guy. He's the one!
Love living in the city! Home sick and is just outside our building getting me soup at Can't beat that!
you had my heart inside of your hand and you played it.
Well this is not gonna be good.
Are you going to do a follow spree when you reach 20K?:)
Thank you. :) You the best. Btw: I loves your tweets.
But not on coke. Just Yoko.
I choose not to tweet, I twaat!
Just experienced some of the worst #customerservice I've had in awhile. More tempted to take my Platinum business elsewhere
Shouldn't you be showering right now so you can be on time tonight?!
If you don't like what I say or how I say it, then so what.......that's life...
hahaa I thought so..
Good for you, Laura!!!
I'm doing well. Figured i would spend some time with my favorite folks tonight
How was the show? ;D
Well it's past midnight on the east coast so...Happy Andy Day!!! Err...I mean Mother's Day!!
For most women the libido peaks just before menstruation.
aghhhh if we both go there we BETTER be hanging out!!!!
Show tonight in Anaheim. COME!
Did kellen Moore for reals not get drafted????
I love the Cannoli man! RT Who out there has photos of Frank “Pepperoni Cannoli Guy” Pecoraro!?! DM please!
Big thanks to for having us out at the Grand Opening of store 500. Thanks also for the $2000 donation! Follow
Sunday's the coffee always taste better.
1D Means Everything To Us :) yes they do, they keep my face smiling ;D
Ill Always Love Yuu . No Matter What .
Damn straight.
TCU 102-#11 UNLV 97. One of the best feelings I've had in my life. I am so happy for Coach Christian, our staff, and our great young men
And Buffalo draws first blood on a Jason Pominville wrister that sailed above Thomas' glove side.
LHP Joe Savery optioned to Lehigh Valley (A). Roster move will be made on Friday. -- Todd Zolecki ()
Pinterest is my new bff !
Who put these hoes in my room
Want a taste of SD's TOP local culinary masterminds? The Sustainable Feast will be here April 22nd for round two.
Who wants their entire tweet read on the radio, make it a good one!
2 miles in the morning with my pup ...
#myhomelesssignwouldsay "don't help me I should be responsible enough to get a job if I'm can write this sign"!
time 4 a new 1,been on these 2 hot songz 4 the past dayz,gon take a break n start somethin else hot!
mad cow? Must be fat bitches.
Tagliani bha come by the garage I will introduce him to you. bryan herta is a scary guy lol
<3LOL I forgot a heart
Second part of Gitelman's talk: Holding Electronic Networks By the Wrong End.
Story definer, bow tie designer, patent decliner, musically finer.
A successful #SMWWDC event needs: 1. Interaction 2. Relevancy 3. Attendees. NAILED it, any other good ones out there?
its name's nice. Yeah I love it!
got our new home ------ wont be ours but i think we can make it home
A word is dead When it is said, Some say. I say it just begins to live that day. - Emily Dickinson
tomorrow is gonna be GREAT < 3 cant wait bitchhs!(:
really grateful for the #lodlam presentation in the #megadata session. Great overview of how LOD and RDF works.
So, someone in the Biden mold, just not as stupid? RT For VP, Romney is looking for "incredibly boring white guy."
Keep an eye out for Book Girl & Cabinet Girl (and more) by Jane Wu..
Worst night of my life: in college, a friend and I decided to drink a bottle of Manischevitz "ironically."
whoop! drops free 'macadelic mixtape' thanks for the heads up !!!
Good Morning!
going get a 12 inch weave in my head...dont support sixteen inch.
Idgaf Bout Yall Buddy Thats What Yo Dumb Ignorant Stupid Ass Fell To Relize Your Not My Nigga I Got My Own NIGGA To Be Thinking Bout BOO!
Join us today at 11am for Senior Tea as Philip Easter, a Baltimore man with an incredible photographic, memory recounts his travel memories!
Went to the springs with today and we saw this guy that looked a lot like too bad it wasn't really him</3
I believe it was Ron Burgundy who said, "I love scotch." That makes two of us, Ron!
I missed an integration conversation? Good thing for you guys, huh and ?
I need to work tonight, but incessant server and InDesign issues we had today sucked it all out of me. Me thinks getting up early is best.
Some folks shouldn't make beats, and some rappers shouldn't be rapping.
Goodnight ! ❤ Sleep With The Angels!^.^
i dont have time for the bullshit
I'm assuming they find love and other shenanigans along the way? Assuming it's a comedy.
at #authorspeak2012? Yes, please!
...but I think what you're looking 4 costs $$$. Also, some you can do some interesting things with Storify one you've...
Happy Birthday George Lucas!
met with Jackie Taylor from Black Ensemble Theater. It's going to be a great addition to the 47th ward.
Happy Easter, how is your day so far? 15
At Broadway Pier on bay downtown San Diego for press conference supporting Navy Broadway Complex project. New jobs & revenue for San Diego.
thank you mistress I'm looking for one
I LOVE ME SOME MICHAEL PHELPS.
Another day another flight -- lax 2 sjc
BUT ITS TERRIBLE (right?)
If anyone wants to attend a special Breathe Carolina show at the AOL office tonight, follow & RT the contest tweet
I need two more golfers on my team for the tournament Friday morning
Anyone else going to the breakfast tomorrow morning?
skype only comes up when you forget to call me back
Maybe going to Sparta for High School
Congrats to Andy Celemens for winning the first #TreasureTuesday Quick Fire challenge.. Well done
um WOWZAAAAA!!!! Teach me how to duggie please :) BAM!
just beat gahanna. i (> winning
Something's wrong w/my TV. The lady on Stossel sounds like Sam Eliot.
awesome, congrats!!! it has been raining all weekend so I haven't been very productive.
People change & love dies. You're never good enough & don't know why. Time passes & things go wrong, but just remember life goes on
Lookn for a great Bible Study and Worship exp today ! Join us - 9:00 Pulse & 10:30 Traditional.
says "Milk is for babies" in #PumpingIron - What do you think of the #RawFood / Raw Milk movement in Cali?
Good morning America! Have a bless and productive day. :)
so cute
Dont crazy for pie ?? What the fuck i ant type.
they are impressive #'s, so why are they always getting a bad review on company status?
I hope you had a good on this day..with love your biggest fan :)
Elena Schaefer & her opponent from New Mexico heading to tiebreaker 3rd game in #1 girls singles...
please keep us posted with any info. Thanks.
out on a limb is a probleeemoo... Shit stoooopiddddddd
Who all stand in place of those that forgot me. I commend you. it must be a hardship to conduct such villainy in the face of grace.
Our air conditioning broke :o it's so freakin hot right now. Now I know how felt. Hahaa
Do you like the trade?
Cowboys will not give up...GO TEAM!
Happy Mother's Day to all of the moms out there.
i'm never gonna catch my breath. say good by to those who knew me. boy was i a fool in school for cutting gym.
I love you !!
#DesignBizChat is TOMORROW! Join at 10 am ET - Collaboration - creating it, making it work, using it to succeed - assembling great teams!
true, its my favorite come back... :/
love that show
A very warm welcome to our new fans from #Portugal! 39 countries now having fun with #iOS game!
red doors?
kick'n sour apples... yeah that's how it's done...
“: #YouShouldNeverTrust a man wearing Capri pants.” couldn't agree more. Nadal is example #1 for me
Baby this ones for you
“: “If a nice guy finishes last, it's because his lady comes first."”
About to head out to play for the African Festival in Bmore. Opening for Najee with Rollexband. Should be a fun hit!!
I see you know That's great, you are both ridiculously wonderful people. I look forward to ur tweets. Viva Travel!
we'll be there tonight!
It's Friday! It's Payday! It's time for sushi!
if I hadn't gotten into BFA, I'd be graduating today.
someone go to Vituccis tonight and get me some free pizza. then meet me at the library tomorrow with it. deal?
You need to get a shop here in NYC
you bet! Looking forward to seeing you at the Lyric some day, soon :)
Really hurtin today. Ugh it just keeps getting worse. :/
heh. no worries.
Can't wait to try my new "They're Real" Mascara by Benefit!
R tells students to befriend the firm librarians, find out what databases, books they have that they wdn't have seen at school.
"baby" ? o_O i dont want to get happy then get sad if it was an accident :(
just pretending to work. How did the test go the other day?
"I feel God" this song always puts me on a great mood!
The September 2010-2011 cohort's completion ceremony is underway in NYC.
in Charlotte.....do you think our family is in danger?
#austinsyear is totally going to be amazing i have to meet him totally #determined !!!!!!!!!!
gettin' my study on at mullins with
This is why I need a dog.
i named my brochure girl Jes U. Schrist huhuhuhuhuhuh
You are so amazing.
hey everybody! sorry if u got some wierd tweets! my account was hacked!!! all fixed now!
Many food and food-related products are invented by people who wanted the item for themselves. Any ideas?
Strivers achieve what dreamers believe.
perfectly still. Hadn't been many pitches up there. Strike 2 was bad, & when Lawrie walked toward 1st, well, anything close...
Check out new movie, "Smitty" looks awesome and is available on iTunes!!
now I no family can't hld water but that's OK cause wat goes around comes around I'm cuting family members off starting tonight
Getting ready to run #Crazylegs with Dan and Emily before we unite & rally against the #WaronWomen!
make it nasty saw a thick bitch walk past me i said whats hannin damn you strapped gee can i have yo number and hit you after school b lol
Where's the feed that contains mic'd up caddies/golfers? Would have been incredible on championship Sunday!
work hd?
Have they made a season 2?
Couldn't agree more. Still have 's thought-provoking interview w/Radio New Zealand's Kim Hill coupla yrs ago on my iPod.
Fondue party!!
Check my profile :D
Wanna see what's going on with barons knee but I don't wanna turn this #orioles game off.
#microstories "I'm ok, he doesn't hit me that hard."
Thanks for registering Sharon!
Trivia Tuesday starts tonight at 9 p.m. Don't be late! Winning team gets 1/2 off their tab, yo.
happy to help support tomorrow.... can you walk while snacking??
Happy Pancake Day to my friends !
Another great show at studio seven ....thanks unwritten law for having us out...some new live recordings will be up soon....thanks every ...
concert for the second session of our high school composers workshop starts in 10 minutes. Look forward to hearing the music!
being easily distracted at work today...thankfully I got a lot done yesterday
just got to say that is fucking awsome!!!!!!!!! :)
Too doo doo too TO!!! Congratulations.
Just watched paranormal activity 2...not quite as creepy as 1.
Grabbing your #hiking boots and heading for a backpacking trip through Europe? DM us all the cool places you'll be visiting.
the one day i actually want to go running its raining, cool
Brush your teeth for at least 2 minutes each session
what's up Greg I just really started twittering so I need your help getting followers, still learning this network...thanks hun!!!
it is a good thing
My timeline is a little boring Need some entertainment can we get a twitter war going here You guys do it best haha and
Just ate my lunch chicken and spaghetti...um great
I really hate the twitter over capacity.
You know you're having a hard day when you pick up "Intellectuals and Society" and see the title "Intellectuals and Suicide"
Stay classy Cincinnati!! Bunch of thugs!!
We can't wait to see you perform !
one of my favs too!
You have to be prepared... What it's the show, who is casting, who are the creatives... Am I even right for anything in it...?
yeah, worth remembering. I was telling a friend about Ringo's last interview in the film.
Seeing "Fela". It's intermission. Y'all. This is the best dance experience I've had in a long time and I'm not even onstage.
It's always a great feeling leaving the middle for the edge.
Got home from the airport with all our snow gear quickly and cheaply thanks to !
I LOVE SONG SKY SCRAPPER ITS SO INSPIRING
See you there. RT: “: last time I saw was surreal. Always been a great show. Tonight, HARLEM, USA.”
I had fun also :) u better call me again today :) I missed ur voice
Consider yourself followed
so last nigh i was dreaming that came into my house ! :D but the one i truly love is why didnt i dream of him ?D;
Can I renegotiate my package cost with you via twitter? Non-promo cost is outrageous and ready to leave Comcast for Verizon.
#steampunk is all about the funky Victorian fashion. Plus steam-powered laser guns. :)
news 12 is coming to interview my bro about the Yankees =] then errands and such all day!
Thank you!
Hey only the worst from Baltimore City! I wouldn't expect anything less! We have standards...sort of.
No WAY!
I wanna know
UVA is the real deal in College Hoops. Definitely could be a sleeper team in NCAA tourney this year.
honestly, I would buy anything I could if you did :D
Fire Threat in Texas for the next couple of days, here
Spring cleaning!
< one month til
Thanks Tony! A few days ago, he donated $25!!! That makes him a Chum Buddy!
he's retarted. That's the only explanation.
2nite-Plug In & Win a trip to London to see Hard Rock Calling 3-day festival. Register at the door-Free live music w/The Hawkeyes.
haha ok u tell him tht. Ill stand behind u and listen
Trying to explain to my dog why I'm sanding the deck and he still looks at me like I'm an idiot.
Other than twitter, yep! Share with us your cannabis knowledge - we'll retweet :D Help increase your community's awareness!
Still working on this Costco bucket of mayo...
You know y'inz are going out drinking tomorrow night, so stop by at 9,& tip a few back and give thanks for
Lol, you got me here! Would've been great for April 1st :)
Alice in Winter Wonderland
looking forward to seeing you all tomorrow!
thanks for the help!
RT : Wear orange or Centraal gear to Sunday for the game and get a free Silly Pils.
Come on we can so do it !
Come out to the Freescale in Oak Hill from 6a-10a and donate to Bikes for Kids! Anything helps! Freescale will be matching your donations!
HACKERS CANT HACK US NO MORE !
lol I woke up for school and my mom was like dan do you wanna go to school? and I was like no and went back to sleep hahaha
A few months ago. I dont remember when but it was near GRB.
I have a follower in Chicago who's a friend of my friend in there and apparently has an interest in curves LOL
Just cut up a human heart with a steak knife, feels good man.
right?! As if doll parts weren't creepy enough on their own...
But I know where you belong, it's right here next to me<21
Thank you to all of our followers who are helping spread the word to fellow passengers and who are also giving us feedback on the new routes
Followed you back(: I like the music
Sorry for some but I must state that I love central air! I'm straight coolin, I'm coolin coolin, I'm coolin.....
Haikeet #2: alone in the pumphouse/ night falls oh dear no flashlight/ hug trees hug trees, home
Will you wish my friend a happy birthday? :)
id LOVE a girls day out! Shopping, shopping and more shopping! Hello! Lol obtw...where do u call home?
My life is filled with bad endings and wrong starts.
I found it to be cathartic. I guess I just related 0_0
ya :/ On julius ceaser & ancient Rome. And one on a world war dictator.
I can't thank you enough for the help with my boy the rapper! you guys rock the promos!
Right when I though someone liked me... He doesn't why would he who ever does NEVER!! I'm done
Thank you as well Scott! For friendship and excellent tweets
"What are you rebelling against, Johnny?" "What've ya got?"
Confining pigs in crates stirs complaint from Humane Society
There always is someone at the college party that is so energetic that they're either on something, or forgot to take something.
love what? Lol
yes most definitely. any chance i can get to see Chip i'm there.
go girl! Lazy can be good and needed some days ;)
just had recruiter say: I can't fit you in a box so don't know how to work with you..yep, that post spoke to me..Happy Monday!
Yep, and Valve knows their shit, gaming has changed a lot since hl2, tough to make a great game in the hl2 vein now.
Okay this is pretty freaking cool
The reason there are two senators for each state is so that one can be the designated driver
I saw a woman wearing a sweat shirt with "Guess" on it...so I said "Implants?"
wonderful news, i'm so impressed!
take ALL of your tweets seriously. About what/whatnot to do, etiquette, being humble, perform and do anything you can, not
Giving up anger, sweets, and fried foods, and gaining a healthier spirit and body.
I didn't watch OLTL, but they did a s/l like that w/the 2 Todds
It's Thanksgiving Week! What is your favorite thing about this week? The food? The family? The..shopping? :)
i cant wait to see ur sexy pics
I'm real ole school, Fab 5 Freddy...Bronx meets SOHO days. I peeped your "block game" and was...oh ish, they gonna win.
yes yes. but send me one now!
Great work with Alex tonight! Long time coming!
End of the 1st quarter, Panthers lead the Rangers 1-0.
Who is this?
you good
BiPolarMoment: Wondering if when I get Alzheimer's I'll forget to be so depressed.
haha u lookin hot girl haha like i have been ready for like 30 min
Keep your game sharp by "putting it on the blade". Right ???
Yo Gary!! The Bike Line, in Indianapolis is a Top 50 Gary Fisher dealer!! Woot Woot!
it is on the list for sure!
:D Iam very sorry your wasting ur time on me
They got and done. 3 more to come!
“: I feel reckless, stupid. I WANNA PARTY.” I'm getting the feeling maegan wants to get fucked up. (: and wants to PARTAAAY.
princess of promotions I see, how so ;)
Tim Tebow's biggest vice: vanilla ice cream. Deserves his own Ben & Jerry's flavor: Plain White Tebow.
trucker hats have hit the streets! online store coming soon, so hit us up to order! $14 each or 2 for $20 with FREE shipping in the
Don't make me break out the ass whoopin cane
When no guy has liked you in 2 years. That when you no you
TRAK Records and Library is recruiting for a Records Management Analyst for their client in # DC or #Chicago. The Analyst will support the …
i feel guilty hitting on women when they have their toddler kid with them
Looking up crap about ukulele's. and I just learned it's "Ukulele" not "Ukelele" .. woops. lol you ? [:
Saturday night in... Which means reading and watching Friends.
I'm confused what ur tweeting me now. Is this what passes for writing over at Coltszilla? Stop talking about ur kids.
put her business card in the bowl and actually won. Free Japanese lunch time!
#AskRomney Do you like big butts? Can you not lie? Can you other brothers not deny?
i live in chicago. lol
what to know if you lived in the Atl
Gonna watch the Real @ Bayern Champions League First leg today??
true - different focus is how one wins (or draws) in a debate - then we end up agreeing with both of them!
“: Man cannot live on bread alone. Now, fro-yo is a different story. #FroYo4Life” what about free bread? Frozen bread?
Decimate ur dreams until its unrecognizable: where it's bits, pieces & fragments. If u can still c it after that PURSUE till its REALITY!
Write. Edit. Review. Graphics. Write. Edit. Review. Graphics. Must be magazine production time.
DPI's 2010 stats show that > 98% of WI public libraries help people find jobs: job searches, resumes & application submissions.
I got some really cute ankle boots at the thrift store for $2! Holla.
Absolutely right! Whatever happened to civility in this world?
New recipe postings every day!! from hawaii! #hawaii #food #recipes #health #gluten free #best recipes #restaurants in hawaii
By the way, I see you. Now I know why you were speaking to Mr. Ryan in the Conseco Fieldhouse hallway. How soon you forget.
And I love your profile!
come and visit! Carnegie Mellon is only 15 min from Braddock - we could share ideas about our art mgmt programs
I haven't beaded for years and want to start again.
“: The warm-up jackets, by the way, are the best feature. National titles listed on the back.” agreed
When I get back to the city, Balthazar breakfast?
some girls are so predictable
follow me
My problem is that I use my own understanding/preparation as a measuring stick for theirs. And that's not fair to them.
Happy Mothers Day to all of our T2 Mothers!
Been working hard today not a real lunch- just had a crunchy carob rise bar- #glutenfree #peanutfree 17 grams protein! Yummy
#YeauAintAvoutZotLyfe RT : don't do it to yourself
I'm ready for some dc loving
"The Wreck of the Edmund Fitzgerald."
#mla12 Agreed. Thought #smartphoneless was the purpose of the blogger/tweeter table.
NO! He needs to spend more and be further to the left!!
The Silk Tie likes Arvind! As life is best lived, people are best looking good and ties are best worn, the circle of life
Know anyone graduating law school this Spring? A legal-themed chess set would make a great gift! But order early, they take time to make!
"You don't know how to have fun the way" -
Don't tell yourself #ohwellohwell and shrug things off. The best time is right now! Who knows what tomorrow will bring.
It's stupid and unfounded but it's not causing any widespread harm. But the anti-vax people and the alternative medicine crowd cause trouble
fuck yeah blowin up 's toilet
Our sub for Speech was on Big Time Rush omg hahaha
This would happen today!! Yea ima be pissed its one of them days
Even Some Of These Old Heads Out Here Still Lost
hahahh, going to a party .... that we never knew about. ;)
Lol that's what makes champs!! “: Just finished the hardest 3 hour practice of my life with Holy crap I'm dead!”
you're welcome! Thanks :) ☻
Trailblazers and Thunder are truly great teams... They make for some exciting basketball for all the fans out there!!!
keep listening to #mediachat Josh RT Where do they drive people? I don't understand the concept?
Hey racetweeps! Anyone have photos of Alex wearing glasses in his Atlantic racing days? (NOT sunglasses) It's for a blog post.
Let's go Chelsea win this.
Thanks, Sarah. Like you, I'm very careful about the products I recommend.
Getting ready to hop on-air on ! If you're not in Laredo, listen online at www.949theworks.com. Text your "fist bumps" to 69491!
Everyone seems to be doing stuff tonight, but I have no plans. Wtf
Yes you will lol
Great advice! Be smart this #Little5, friends. Listen to your inner cricket! RT : Let your conscience be your guide.
my school doesnt have mirrors in the bathrooms. WTF. only in the gym.
If you are busy thinking about your neighbor's garden, you cannot cultivate your own.
Allegro Dance Company will be performing at the Ohio County Library in Wheeling WV on March 15 @ 7pm...join us!
"You know what, Evian? You should be really embarrassed because your parents named you after bottled water"
u be doin shows? U rap or somethin?
Spend a lot of time talking to customers face to face. You'd be amazed what number of companies do not listen to their customers.
B*tch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid
CARDS WIN!!! CARDS WIN!!! CARDS WIN!!! LET'S CELEBRATE!!!!!!!
me too lmfao! i was so young!
a gentleman doesn't discuss those details :)
Ahh it seems like every month there are problems with Sallie Mae, I have not yet had one good experience with them -- the worst!
Merry Christmas to all our friends. Look forward to seeing you in the New Year
Imma make you my bitch
New styles and sizes of the popular imprinted acrylic tumblers available for your next promotion.
too bad I don't live in Mystic Falls, you and I could be buddies!!! xD
And dare I say Rihanna's bad roots and Flashdance-esque perm looks kind of FRESH?
Is it true tht Lil Wayne is dead?!?!?!?!
it was an early night for the boy last night bra...Had to work today
Just got off the phone with my auntee .. Me love her so . <3
I cant stand when I put on lipgloss and its windy and my hair just keeps on sticking to my lips!! STUPID!
Bought Groupon for NM Magazine. Was so excited. When I went to redeem, my code didn't work. (1/6)
#Np Higher - J. Cole
I'm heated Louisville lost but it's OK cuz my state is still in it
Yes they do!
Blown Away is her new one, I love it! So Small, Just A Dream are more of my faves. They're beautiful :)
ok i will ima eat some cereal. lets use lots of emoticons
you tell me - I don't know where to begin
I would totally buy a similar owl travel mug if only they made them in grown-up sizes ;)
I wonder sometimes.....
gotta listen to the jams to make it till the end of the day. don't hate.
all the power to you my man. Quite a few undiscovered talents have come through SKC's tryouts btw. How old are you?
thats what girls are for!! thats what girls are for!
you have the wrong Russell on today, Russell Wilson.
Please ensure you and your family stay safe and prepare for Hurricane Irene. www.JaklitschLawGroup.com
DON'T GIVE ME THAT SASS.
Psyched to be in LA for sessions with my old chums: Chapman Stick player Steve Ellison and trumpeter Eric Dahlman!
just got off #tired af.!!
so excited to read the write-up! Love your stuff. Congrats;)
Go avs. Love that hockey gonna be on soon.
When is true #RandB gonna come back?!?
BALL'N TIL I FALL OUT...DAYUM!!!
This halftime show could be a #Stefon bit from snl. There are roman soldiers, tightrope dancers...
The greatest weapon against stress is our ability to choose one thought over another. ~William James
thanks amber :) <3 much love
fly away, little angel, fly away....
I hate oh snap! Mainly cuz it's like hearing some1 say gosh darn it. Or oh fudge. Just swear! We know what u really wanna say!
make sure you get approval from beastmode for the SKITTLES.
I cant wait !!!
i really wanna go to 's bday party
I just made the best Spanish rice EVER!!!
Awww u should go to Hoot Fest! I'm going! I wonder of hell be there!? Hmm
#GirlsWithPrettyFeet ???? wtf is wrong with people?
went a wee bit heavy on the hot salsa during lunch.
Doritos, for breakfast?duh.
So good.
Dear man on the bus, Pleated khakis. Your glasses threaded tidily through an eyebrow ring. None of the other accountants go to Burning Man.
Watching a Christmas-y Glee.
I love this!!
the celtics have the weirdest looking fans...go cry
I Write & Direct, but I've A.D.'d, grip and PA. I like being on others sets when I can. But I'm a writer/director at heart.
All new schedule for school today
i guess ill stick to what i agreed on since the beginning, 'go with the flow' ill do just that, even if it leads me through a hurtful path.
Where all my Cowboy fans at? Our Lakers got a fucking game to play $_$
Let's catch up where we left off last year at #SoSlam tomorrow. Can't wait!
#LPR2011 check out #GroverNorquist 's book "Leave us alone"
happy birthday! Xo
It's official, Chase Bank beats Comcast as worst customer service. You can't get any lower than this.
hey stranger
my brotha!!! wats good wit u man
Would Colts be silly taking him over Luck?
I'm going to Jaleo at the Cosmo. :)
is sad... first time in 2 years.
I don't inform most people, but most people leave knowing they didn't get the job.
I wish I could just start a 5885435 year long tour.
ready for some baseball :-)
Too funny! RT I just saw a girl who looks like Lindsay Lohan in Parent Trap. Think Lindsay will sue her?
happy november y'all. let's not forget the best holiday is coming up.. thanksgiving!!!
the Angel fans are really pissed off right now I hear them cry and cry on the Angel Radio show in california
Hey I'm a fangirl who enjoys obsessing over Cody Simpson, One Direction, & Ariana Grande.
Im confused someone said yea and another person saying no
...so i couldnt charge my phone lol!!! what r u doin?
20 pages tonight and 20 pages in the morning.
what did i miss?? moroccan scrambled eggs??
Thanks to everyone for getting their dues in today. To the 7 of you that didn't, we are coming for you.
Her name is BRANDY if u didn't kno. Also get u a copy of #PutItDownOniTunes may8th get into it.
Too soon to listen to holiday music, unless of course you're mid-holiday campaign & need to hear jingle bells ;)
I don't know what to wear. .
re. your #RDF document (or resource), you can also just add a foaf:primarytopic relation too. Anyway, I'll make an example
!!! Yes Desi!! Congrats!! Lovin your success lady! Gives me HOPE~! And CONFIDENCE in my FUTURE!!
Mamas come first, true. How'd you get 10k?!
please please please please please. When are you home?
My Quote of the Day - "When I had nothing to lose, I had everything. When I stopped being who I am, I found myself.", Paulo Coelho
Thank you!
Settling in for Desert Island Press conversation up in the coffee shop. It's much quieter here this pm!
investigations hosted by yours truely
Nice, congrats!
beat the story last night.
This game is what I woke up to? -.-
Looking at course schedule for next Spring and considering textbook adoptions.
TOPLESS TOPLESS TOPLESS!! Why arent u in here with us have a few drinks?? Cum smoke some hookah and grab a dance from your favorite lady!
$2.50 Bud light pints all night!!!! Mention this tweet and get a FREE APPETIZER tonight (thurs 10/22) See ya soon!!!
you just did!.(: lol what you up to?.(: omg i gotta tell you something!:o
Going out tonight? Always have safe and reliable transportation. We accept all major credit cards with no minimum payment!! 520-798-1111
tell me about it
Eric Cooper and Dino in Long Beach, CA together HS Hoops look out LOL
"Jumping crocodiles Charlie!"
Refreshing twitter pg just to see if she tweets you back or RT's you...... #itsavictorianthing :{D Happy Early Bday Vic!!
R.I.P Whitney Houston
The best! So jealous.
Firm Solutions Unlimited a BPO service provider specializing in law firm back-office solutions. website: www.firmsolutionsltd.com
People that do that are SO annoying. RT You don't have to respond to everything
#MyFaveCelebApprenticeContestantIs Homework.... NOT!!!!
Well, perhaps there's a role in Duplicity for me?! : )
RT When someone unfriends or unfollows me, I just assume that they have a low tolerance for awesome. LOL!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
fixing our economy shouldnt allow our president to spend more money we dont have
Farmers Market here I come! 🍆🍅🍎
Looking good, Darren P.
TY for the love!
We took Jack on a NYC Subway uptown to his next meeting. Maybe can tweet the picture.
What happens in Vegas stays in Vegas....unless your friends posts it on Facebook.
Yes, we unschool at home. Child-led interests, natural learning.
You're a bacon of a banana!
I need to start putting as a business reference. Tf am I doing in life?!
Your next shot to go to Oahu and see where filmed is happening at 6:56p!
Listening to Real Time with Bill Maher
Did a BodyRock workout AND went for a run tonight. Hopefully I sleep well!
learned today that some politicians know more history than history professors. hmm. darn shame I wasted all those years getting a PhD.
That means Thursday is double-charge-my-checking-account day. Can't wait to talk to another overseas rep!
Kalipari vs Self in the championship again. Hope Kalipari win this one this time. Need for Kentucky to grab a win
Silent House was the BEST movie EVER!
no delivery...come get it. PS I own a big knife and a gun. LOL
I like the LCD's. Just do... Good Luck...
haha! you know they hate us!
shoutout to my new followers and
Ha! Approaching 4,000. “: im mad got more tweets then me.. gotta step my tweet game up in order to pass him”
Ignorance is bliss.
Glad it works for you! We didn't know :) and will tweet generally--
Watching Fear; man oh man is Marky Mark a creepo!!!
I was thinking the same thing Maria,,,,we miss you Frank!!!
Omg I got a follow that said Austin Mahomies and thats all I saw and i thought it was you:( its not:'(
What bourbon did you wish Siri would get you?
new to twitter <3
Well HELLO!!!
My Name Is Mahataa teaches us to reach out to our spiritual elders who hold the key to higher consciousness and who can show us the way.
Nice day today. Now I'm headed to the farmers market trying to get something to eat!
thats for true, but hey the maintenance man might end up being a hottie! Or better yet, might be able to teach you karate!
my biggest wish is for you to follow me,i would be so happy, i would cry:)
Regence BlueCross BlueShield to drop its Portland-area provider network for individual members, giving them fewer choices or more costs h...
I wonder how many guys pretend to be gay so they hang around Hott girls all day?
I have a lot of work to do
Can you RT. I have a ticket to the ASOB show in NY. It needs a good home. I can't go. I'm in a wedding. I live in Philly.
My mom keeps telling me not to go to prom and that it's totally wack..she went to her prom in 70s...... lol
she being so fucking petty i swear
Been a lonely kinda weekend. Embracing my independence. Dogs, park, sun, book, snack, journal,smash.
I think you just have a show so you can take off clothing and show millions with out being a porn artist
Can we please have an award show without Taylor Swift.
Ok well Daron just stole my heart.
lmao i love how you already knew who that was about (': mwah
if i was a bunny & i wanted to bang bunnies, i'd bang lola!
we still have time !!! C'MON LAKERS
All I want to do is cuddle with you... that's it! & I'm sure of it...
RT "Going to see Diana Ross tonight? Bring in your ticket stub before/after concert & receive 20% off food!"
I she's adorable, haha.
“: Thanks for the follow ” Ditto!!
I'm going to Wienerschnitzel. Who wants to join me?
Can't you just tell me what's wrong? Tell me everything that's going on? You left me lost and confused, feeling like I was being used
Heading to the farmer's market to see what the state of the cabbage is.
Set up a google alert on myself and so far all I've gotten are 2 obits for Mary Quicks in Missouri and Kansas. RIP ladies.
just yelled YOLO as walked across the stage for her diploma.
I need to shower! Blah! I smell like last nights bon fire still.
I just hit Cmd+Q to close an app on my PC. Nicely done Apple!
im ready for the weekend
Welcome to my world.
32 days until our hospitality suite will open for our 50th appearance at the Final Five. Go Jollymen !!
Come join us this Thursday at Rusty's Surf Ranch on the Santa Monica Pier for a Battle of the Bands. We play at 9:30pm. And it's a free one!
Today's my daddy's 38th birthday :') I love him so much.
daily reminder
gotta go my bf wants to....uh...yeah do something important see ya
Heard in the #PersonalLibrarian office suite "I have a problem. I can never go into the Diana without buying #frenchfries."
Knowledge is knowing a tomato is a fruit. Wisdom is not putting it in fruit salad.
What a weekend! 2 GREAT auditions, killer CD Workshop, shot a short on Sunday! And lots of amazing new followers! Welcome all!!!
i cant wait until your tour starts im so excited!! will you please do the favor and follow me (: peace love bieber<3
To better understand the great sub-prime collapse of 2007, read this book: The Greatest Trade Ever, by Gregory Zuckerman. (And it's fun.)
my new motto : be nice to Elizabeth or you ain't getting shiiiet
the saints i just dont see any other team
Seuss. Was. Genius.
Just saw Tom Crean at the pacer game!
of course!:-)
Hope you're lovin' it!
I'm going to be really sad when my #traderjoes sea salt and turbinado sugar dark chocolate almonds are gone.
$2 pints of Schlitz and RW Stein. $3 micro pints. 2-4-1 wells. What a great day to spend with me at 3007 s K.K. Blackbird. 4-9pm
No, I will not wait until after the holiday. We will get the work done today!!!
RT RT : . Illegal aliens have no Constitutional rights. Those are reserved for US citizens.
Pacsun is closing down.. These truly are, bad times.
Who wants to make 500 to 1,000 dollars a week from home without selling anything? Hit me up
If we all report it to twitter, and ask twitter to change his email to his first setup email, he might get access again
From the wild things in this office, RIP Maurice Sendak
no one really .. like my class only has like 5 people
Swear to God I'm going to be single for the rest of my life!!
I've concluded that the more you eat for breakfast, the harder it is to go up the stairs.
you miss Japan, I miss Italy, we both dislike Greg sellnow, we both love each other. =
best day ever <3
lol. You'll get over it.😉
can we start every sentence on twitter with "suhhyeah"? well we just did so there
Live, Learn & Love what you do.
plz follow Tara10735275 she is new to twitter and don't have allot of followers
Underground Podcast #2: Backseat Boyz d. Shaun Tempers and Tank with the T-Gimmick.
The 6oz. flask is mobile, fits perfectly in the back of your jean pockets, and a good size for a party.
believe imma drink some serene water real soon lol
My phone was DOA as of 11:42PM of the 22nd day of October in this year of our lord 2009. Will return calls asap.
VAMPIRES FROM HOLLYWOOD: this business will suck the life out of you. COMING SOON FROM CANYON PICTURES! SEEKING INVESTORS
shout out to and for doin a great job on the video shoot BR coming soon to a theater near you
Julia's power-suit has made all the difference today
since when??
I am so drunk right now.....
umm yall better not leave me here!
What do you know about the future of NXT?
"Don't Ya" finished at Sine Studios, it's got even more of and edge. New version online soon. Mastering Demo Tuesday at Studio 4!
Sometimes if something is not right, it doesn't mean that it is necessary wrong at the same time...
Looking at my favourites<3 saw 2 of them that Austin tweeted me! omg last one was 36 days ago(:
MUST. MUST. I'm really excited that you'll be close by.
If you couldn't get into Nance's film it also screens Sat. at 2:15.
Chalmers is so retarded to me sometimes but that's my dude
looks like its sundayfunday then, when you startin?
Heard from an old friend today who is an awesome artist. Hoping to collaborate with him on a guitar strap creation.
Tornado drills across Indiana today, just heard sirens and thought it was 11am on Friday.
Presenting to Sage Millennium customers at SCMUG today. All about community and what's next with
Being a licensed cab driver, I am a source of infinite wisdom.
Ahh back to the quiet neighborhood again... :) Still more work to do!
aww you're the best. I am staying in bed.
My new Fav Follow
NORMA..THANK YOU 4 RE-TWEETING OUR RANKINGS..SPREADING THE SQUIRREL-WORD MEANS MUCH 2 ME..TONY..F/S..(SQUIRRELS RULE)!!
The British #mother, Russian mother, Chinese mother, American mother ... a German mother, or Italian mother. It's all the same. [1943-02-14]
now your swinging low...i thin they were like the 2nd cd i ever bought...its not very good
What about Prince at SB? I thought that was better than U2.
Just finished my first page of my screen play... feels good to finally start it, after having the idea in my head for years!
What a great day! Perfect ending to the work week.
lightning round: reflect on the past couple of days. what have you learned? what keeps you up at night?
A run to Sonic Drive Thru after school on a Friday. Awesome stuff.
I have a twitchy eye & I feel like a pirate!...AAARRRGGG!!!!...Why do I want to capture Peter Pan?
Months later it still makes me mad.. You're such a bad person and you're completely oblivious to the fact..
what's up sis
Finna Clean Up - Jammin This #Jeezy - Full-time Job got my Attn Today...Startin My Day...
A customer just showed me pictures of her home destroyed by a car that drove right into it... I was shocked
can I give our offer. DM u!
Thanks Josh! No, I didn't end up doing The Voice. Did Disney instead. :]
Rise & Shine! Have a good week everyone ☺
Should You Buy a Smoothie Blender? High-speed smoothie blenders have become increasingly popular lately, as people look for more ways to
Behind the scenes on Game of Thrones: It's grown-up, wildly complex and full of Yorkshire accents. Yet somehow '..
We got a special connection were no one can come in between. We made a promise to each other we gonna never end
Tailgating @ cowboys stadium ... Fixin to get live in the game!
oh boy. shenanigans
nah its snowing in buffalo, just a little.
i see u got jokes
True. CPW (cost per wear) is lower that way!
Blowing up your phone til your actually man enough to talk to me about this..
I am proud of Dwayne Wade and the positive image he portrays as a Blackman taken care of his kids. TBR
and I love you back for being one of the sweetest people I've ever met! =)
python products may not be shipped to the state of California
Fred can you DL Viber on your cp or any handheld?
you never live chat during the show. You should cut that line for your script to include one more politically incorrect comment
Yes, I'm at panel 110, Queen Anne and the Arts.
nope on both fronts. :(
Al Sharpton is right and Tavis Smally has always been a tool of the right.
Its too early to be awake -__-
Had so much fun working with foster children today. Their gingerbread houses turned out great!
#OSM is important but imperfect #wherecamptb2012 needs to overcome obstacles to make much more utilitarian in nature
you know I am!
Beer Pong Tables ordered...Looking to start beer pong on Wednesday nights at 10pm. Get your teams ready! Bud Light drafts $3
RT : First 10 people who come in with "I voted" stickers on today between 12-2pm = shot of
Some niggas get on my fucking nerves
Just so Grant Ward knows, u dont tell my sister that she has lost her life with out me beating your ass.. You just wait bud its coming
are you dating Alexis or is it just a rumor ??
Can't wait to see Paige tommrow
I tell u ThingLink navigation is better than standard nav. I have to work up courage to do it for my site.
where are you going next thursday?
Madonna&BritneyRulePop Monsters stepped on 2fan bases. Crazy monsters! & don't forget, crazy monsters trended RIP Madonna before. PATHETIC!
thanks :) I love it! Thanks for the encouragement. BOOM
has a way of living life with class.
I like the wysiwyg module because you can expand on it with things like the IMCE Bridge. Plus config is easier
he and I have the same last name, I used to tell people he was my uncle as a kid...not anymore...
thanks for following! Hope you have a great Friday!
This dirty ass bitch just tried to come for me..... don't do it is all imma say !!!!!!
its sunday, officially.. monday? school.
it's the shit. So worth it. I got bumped up to some exclusive free Zappos shipping, too!
Lots of fans representing at the #capsbruins today
My parents are cool with you sleeping over the day before my birthday :)
thinks a park party is in order very soon. www.myspace.com/dubhelix
Pressure cookers are fucking horrifying.
ALL nigga's want is PUSSY !!! Lmfaoo mf.s begging females & shit Like wtf ! Nigga beat yo meat & get it over with! damn! SHAME!!! #TRAGIC!!!
Lmao I'm hilarious.
good luck in the race today!!
yeah and it's his first art show ever...he definitely has a lot of talent!
Doing test runs on these Pillowcases again!! Anyone interested DM me! See pics in previous post!
yo that bitch looks like Skrillex
Bologna Sandies make for Happy Time.
The 2009 Cuvee Julia is now out in limited quantities. Fit for #Presidents, kings, queens and anyone who loves a great grape!
- is there an easy way to look up UK case citations? Having an awful time of it.
go to bed!!
Q2b) a. no money b. no experience setting up c. can't get most to do Twitter, IM, FB, how will they manage VW?
do you know when the tech/ops team meets?
hahaha. Sonic should put that on their dumb TV ads:-)
My day job is consuming my soul...
you can't follow ??
i might get a macbook :)
Truck in the shop so I can't even sleep smh
Aw yea!! RT : OVER ONE MILLION FANS DEMAND PARANORMAL ACTIVITY Get ready for the fright, Nation!
Gettin drunk on a weekday?....
Thanx for the support, hope U r well buddy RT : thnx Joy
The California Conservative Action Group is presenting statewide district maps to the Commission.
Austin will you follow me.. Today is not a good say:(
You Have NO Flaws, Ari<3 Don't be Modest(:
what you don't know, won't leave a scar. what you don't know, hasn't killed you so far.
A few installations of OvalAir but not of GeoMass, we're looking for prototype sites now.
pushing down to the finish line .... #BeastMode wouldn't let me off... I just finished a 10.2 mi run with Nike+ GPS.
will ask you about hydra packs soon..shoulder bladder vs hip bladder stuff!! thx for all tonight..off to bed!!
Yes, it was!
Arrogant, selfish and self centered people
": Imma $how u how to get this cake.. #bagofmoney" M! Oh, is it chocolate?!
Look I cant even mention erybody here right now. S/O to
I'm kicked back they call me the beach Dr.
as I said, I'm not denying the complete bias in the way they've done it :-)
No, I do not want to make this song my ringtone. Especially if it's "black hole sun".
#AprilFools! Need some good jokes. Any ideas? xox.
The best and shortest road towards knowledge of truth [is] Nature.
So sad!
Not yet. I'll keep you posted. :)
Go follow --> ? she follows back and i will ist u 20x!
My dear, we didn't have class.
did you try the Lytro ? Anything good ? Gadget or game changer ? (I have my answer...)
Good morning Boston!! How is everyone? Tweet me your favorite club in Boston.
Pats did good for themselves in rnd 1. But they still have work to do. Jones and Hightower can't do it by themselves. That D was atrocious
when you start your blog point all your social media accounts there. You see how I have it in my twitter profile?
Gettin this shirt wit vashia , they need to hurry the fuck up
I want to factory reset my phone, but I'm still scared.
find us on #facebook ! www.facebook.com/tijerasnaturalproducts
mine did too got it replaced good as new at a nice place in Vancouver for 100 bucks
how much is a one day pass at snowshoe? I finally found my gloves and beanie and socks lol now im able to go
needs to study. finish script n im done.
Day one of marching band? Success. :)
Follow Me??
don't come to campus yet, we are having a shelter in place, there is a gas leak, everyone is supposed to avoid the campus.
that's going to change soon. Love you god bless you and may god keep you good night😘
Charlie Sheen is sticking it to the man!
wats up bro
Cook hopes to regain Vikings teammates&#39; trust
what does smjk stand for? did i miss something big?
yeah it's pretty sweet we even have team jerseys no big deal...
Guess I'm not cynical enough. You've ruined all my illusions about myself.
#Loex2012 I like how interactive the presenters are #PollEverywhere #cellphones I am surprised they allow texting in class
sounds delicious, let's do it!
gotta show some respect for the
You are here to do something you are uniquely created for. No one else can do it like you can, that's why you're here.
I've heard that 78 or 80 Republican members of the House consider The Notebook to be their favorite movie.
sittin watching television... i hate wating tv it bores me but i had like 10 dvrd shows my mom wanted to delete :p
Let me get some action, from the back section.
Great but some events are national or international :-) Can that be considered during the redesign? #keepupthegoodwork!
DITTO! Lets go
awesome article! thanks for the mention!!
oh, i get it.
<3 you are awesome.
Headed to San Diego for Than Merrill & Fortune Builders Marketing & Wholesaling Event. Was given the opportunity to come up on stage and...
thanks for all of the support to Maryland Voices and Cool Blue Souls!
vote vote vote vote for justinbieber do it or die
Hi and , this is going to be a GOOD chat!
hey!! Mahomie can you please follow me back<33 :D
HAHAHAHHAHAHAHHA I FORGOT ABOUT THAT
I like when you tweet to fans. I'm a fan and I'd cry and freak out if you tweeted me. Please?
Shopping for Halloween costumes.
#FF Gregarious guys, gives grins & grimaces. Go get him!
I am literally crayin
hey bella cam you follow me please i love you'r personage in sake it up yu are munch
Morris will not continue as basketball coach, per AD Jeff Lueders. They're posting that job right now.
RT : I think it's safe to say that Katy Perry performance was a public middle finger to Russell Brand
If I end up on third shift and have to miss my brother's senior football season, I'll cry. #seriously #lovemybrother 😭😰😢
after spending a solid ten minutes with spell-check, I can confirm that it's spelled "whittle."
City rat blogoff? Why not combine forces and have a City Rat blog-awareness day?Either way, our staff is drinking Schlitz.
at your show! thats whats up!
Who understands the needs of the middle class? 3 guesses and first 2 arent Romney & Palin. #NoBrainer -> President Obama
RT Does anyone in Nashville have, (or know of) a completely white room we could use for a video shoot on Wednesday? Holla at m
we are
The Illinois Lottery began selling online lottery tickets on the Internet, setting a trend for other states with lottery to follow as well.
Real confused. I met all my goals but i'm still disappointed. Not making much sense to me.
amnesia was rocking tonight
That's why I skip straight to the whiskey.
Half my seat is wet.. So now half my ass is wet. Thanks.
I need to get lifted asap
Pulaski Hwy N of Bmore signed as cycling route. Don't get how a lone cyclist could survive it. Shoulders disappear, 6 lanes of heavy traffic
my level of confusion is worse than I thought! All coming back to me now haha
You will never become who you want to be if you keep blaming everyone else for who you are.
yes he is!
yea.....when u ready to go half on a baby
in Cincinnati, eating Krishna with my boyfriend. Life is good.
follow me please? (:
I can say enough good deeds have been done for the night
I'm liking this Warriors game. Not taht the W's are close but that former PG Patty Mills has 22 pts and 9 assists thru 3Qs
That's y I try to support GOOD music or in my option I think is good music!!
Bill I hope this is real. Please give more details.
thanks man. Keeping at it is the hardest part. My homie has me doing this 100mi/100days challenge So I'll be back at it tomorrow!
haha good idea
Bull frog is what the lifeguards on the beaches in Florida use!
And thank you for the opportunity to see Close and McTeer shine in Albert Nobbs, too. Both #oscarnoms !
Love can make you do things that you never thought possible.
Yes I waited and it was the hardest thing EVER. But I'm SO GLAD I did!!!
Good afternoon all. Happy weekend!
With Crimson in command has left Levien gym. Spike Lee as well. Harvard up 74-65 25.6 seconds left in OT
Lyrical Nephilim giant, look me up in the bible.
you. Wanna. Be. With. Me👍
awesome!!! I love good news.
Can't wait tell tomorrow ,imma have fun
where are you now?
Working the 500 track today its super slow!
how did the 3t game go
Just when I thought I had finally rescued my desk from a sea of paperwork, more arrived. Damn.
Gonna be a productive day. Make every day productive...
Game testers wanted by these titans in the gaming industry only have to worry about time
Vinnie Vocalsis performing Live at The Ugly Dog Saloon this Friday! NO COVER CHARGE! Go have fun with Live entertainment!
no, i mean life :(
Work sucks period!!
All the best to you at this event, Helen. I heard the atmosphere isn't exactly pro-public-schools.
ha, i would? haha. okayy. :p
I mean... you can. LOL
Trust in the Lord forever, for the Lord God is an everlasting rock ~Isaiah 26:4
Some people have no tact. Hope finals are going fabulously!
Text "ENVY" to 46786 and you'll get messages with our drink specials, event info, and FREE COVER offers each weekend! :)
Majestic Bay in Ballard is ad-free!
Hug your favorite Coastie or police officer tonight. Thinking of those law enforcement and military families in Kodiak and Greenland, NH.
if u gotta ask u already know
Sounds like you're having a fun day on set...haha
Thanks!!! for the retweet for our free acting workshop
Shame on for putting personal politics before progressive change.
For sure dog and you've got to be there for 2.0 all digital marketing event
Ya but he's sleeping lol
#wiunion, thanks for help - found a way to get my son here.
hey! can you tell me how you get alerted to large drops in rankings?
Great question about one person shops hopping into participatory culture. suggests Flickr, History pin, etc.
I want to make everyone in my present life go to a big middle school dance. Think of all the angst only slow usher songs could solve!
Sad day in America. No justice, no peace.
#Marlboro, Preventing more sex then marriage.. RT #YouLookedGoodUntil I Seen You Put A Fat Ass Marlboro In Your Mouth...
Lozis are not of one tribe. Malozi are the people of Bulozi or Barotseland – constituted by 37 tribes including MaMbowe, MaKwandi, etc
Lies Like Rug
your personal sessions only display to you, regardless of the publicness of your conference schedule.
UNR students rock! This week (it's only noon on Friday now) we have printed 165 posters! Good going students & employees!
i don't want to present anways..Hope me & keli go on monday.
Side note: WHO is ready for RECORD STORE DAY? Mark your calendars, this year it falls on 4/21!
that stink :(
ah, Ontario is province. So it would be, I you live in Toronto Ontario?
Ben Nye is best for future references.
#thatawkwardmoment when you're watching an american movie dubbed in Japanese
Lol! Yup, it is
A world where the likes of Josh Morgan, Jason Campbell & Eddie Royal are trending on isn't a world a sports fan wants to be part of
In a society That has destroyed all adventure, the only adventure is to destroy that society
if you talk about something after it airs, it's not a 'spoiler.' Spoilers come from sneak previews and such.
did anyone get a picture of the reserved seats for tea party in jfc? Headline: "these seats were paid for by..."
it was adrian but no one is gaining weight over here
It's called the fastlane #idiot:)
Getting my nails done and this lady is making me bleed so much -_-
go gay and you'll be happy forever
If you can't find your favorite show on MPTV 10, try checking out 36. We've moved some viewer favorites there during the GREAT TV AUCTION.
Seriously there's nothing to do at work tonight, and I'm alone ..... fuck
I don't ever want to play the 'mean girl' games with people. I want to be the kind of lady that brings people together.
my hair hurts
#DailyQuote: "Love the animals: God has given them the rudiments of thought and joy untroubled." - Fyodor Dostoyevsky
send your fans some pics
I did 'Absolutego' the other day. Just building up my stamina for an all-day marathon, switching tween that and 'Leng T'che'.
Late Night Happy Hour Tonight from 11pm-2am...stop by tonight!
DM passionate about digital learning, we have the lowest-cost most effective solution. To help in your state who do we talk to?
happy birthday!
VERY frustrated this morning. ALL of my sites w are unaccessible to anyone w - somebody better get their shit together.
Please help. Do I start a hot Damian Williams over DeSean Jackson?
isn't coming near your city on the mini-tour
It's great to hear my uncle play guitar again. He's still my biggest musical hero.
Tell him grill does not have to = meat. I vote for a cheap >$80 grill so he can grill veggies this summer. Veggie kabobs! :)
Well, im Marc, where you from miss lady
Thats like...the WORST quote ever lol RT : Wherever you go, there you are. :D
I'll be anywhere you want me to be baby. :)
2 yrs in a row we have a RHP in Finals who turned down 1st rd money in MLB draft! Is that what it takes now?!
My bff and I have been sleeping and watching movies al day. LOL
You're welcome sis, God bless you :)
lol I know I love that movie
Something I missed- #RandomHouse plans to up prices March 1st to e-audiobook levels. I fear we are about to be priced out
Quote of the Day: Stop in this week for a refreshing Mint Shake in honor of St. Patrick's Day!!!!
I'm right here!
changed mi twitter name again lml
Nice seeing and at the #Tradhome #newtrads shindig
no like I just was messaging him & he randomly replied (: ahaha
im loving our conversation hahahah <3
Dictator time. My prediction is that it will be Aladeen.
#ogw Seattle PD sees that release of crime and 911 data will save time and money answering media calls and others.
i have a full tank of gas, and nothing to do. let the adventures begin.
I just texted a friend, asked her "whose house are we having dinner at?" I'm really hoping she texts back, "Run's house."
the fast brown fox hopped past the boring dog.
Time to learn to play 19 new songs by Sunday!
We're going wi-fi free every day from 11-2 starting Mon. 6/21, to free up more seats for lunch customers.
well got allot going on my head it on blast im thinking abotu allot and needing to make changes. oh yeah no border bash for me FML!
Watching "Don't mess with the Zohan" and I love it!
safe travels!
Oren B. talking about scholarly publishing
ok, come one...how come Grilled Cheesus is trending higher than Roy Halladay? This is ridiculous. Do something twitter people!
I do believe, help me with my unbelief.
Whoa! That's really cool!
Excellent. I filed a few extensions too. :-)
The Bulls are the worst team in the NBA. They cag all their shots.
Unfortunately, it will also be easy for the rest of NYC to pick...
"If you can believe it, the mind can achieve it."
I'll figure it out
Hey man enjoyed your group tonite. Loved the vibe. Praying traveling mercies.
I left off on 6x10 in my OTH rewatch (convenient right?). I think it's time to pick it back up. #YayyForDVDs 😊
(hip hop x loud) + coffee = workplace productivity
Aww youre so sweet! What are you up to this weekend? Lets get together!
Awesome news! Very happy for you guys!!
less speaking. more drinking.
RT : I see.. said the blind man.. to his deaf wife..
I had to do something with my dad LOL
This is taking forever ....
remember the Eddie Murphy scandal we don't need that kind of press for you
The only reason why people feel like they must control you is because they do bad themselves.
your welcome....please feel free to retweet it.
Thanks for the RT looking forward to seeing more tweets from you
Flashback malware could have netted creators $10K daily, says Symantec
I'll DM Cody Simpson for you but you must following
Thanks for the support!
new music for your ears dumb nigga....... tsss... stupid.
RT TQ Ments | Thank you! That's Right, I''ve found u - TQ! The gift of Thank U! W00t
I am STILL stuck in #minneapolis - our plane apparently needed to be "rebooted" AFTER we took off. I wish I had my travel buddy
LOL I wish! Ive been working every weekend. My days off are during the week so I don't have time to get LIVE. :/
oh I love that & thank you!
Thanks for the love!
Hush, you love me and you know it. So....deal wit it. Haha
have a great day!
talk about it somewhere only we know
no more to be said now goodbye
appreciate U! #CubanDog sounds good!!
If it comes back to you, its yours!
oh sweet thanks for thinking of me!
Drivin, drivin, drivin...... u know u love the BR. When u. Drive 6 hours just to be n town for ONE day!! That's love!
oh well... Nothing we can do about it!
Dinner with my love <3 #TexasdeBrazil has the best food I've ever tasted. M :)
yippee to you! if you give out love and goodness, it comes back to you...
Shout out to new followers
If Artest thought/was trying to sell it was an accident during the celebration, he should've at least checked on Harden. Kept running down.
Grooming the dog
On that boss for a day status thanks to (y)
Cop: "Sir, what's in the bottle?" Me: "It's water." Cop: "Sir, this is wine." Me: "What? That damn Jesus! He did it again!"
Debuting "See Yesterday...Today" to media today. (Hint - bring your smartphone next time you jog at Reynolda.)
Hope it didn't disappoint!
Happy Mother's Day to all the mammas out there! You are appreciated! <3
I'm not trying to be involved with the world today.....
Cmon pacers, crunch time
Waiting in a coffee shop with all the other business shleps. But hey, I've got a pizza case!
A room full of salsa dancers is a beautiful thing to behold with Orquesta De Kache. Ready to groove in tonight!
The DBQ was on cricket. Seriously.. CRICKET?!
Tryna sneak outta Miami tonight
i am a full time college student soon to be living on my own again, with an internship and a job, i need to save moneyyss
Submitted to a number of 2010 film fests (fingers crossed). Now trying to organize a local "sneak preview" towards the end of February...
It's kind of ironic that my ex called and then the song Jar of Hearts came on the radio..
thanks for the spotlight. At roughly 350M of us that is close to 2.2 Billion pounds of trash a day!!!
i wish i could of went to one of your #welcometoparidise concerts. Even tho i couldnt i still love and support you! 143 <3
Thanks for the add! Hah. Totally suck with mobile Twitter.
don't we always lol
Wonder when I'll let myself back into the wild again.
I'm going to be up late again :(
Love this. "The Earth laughs in flowers." -- Ralph Waldo Emerson
Good to know :)
Thank you for your support of our military service members, veterans and their families!
I so so missed my sweet girls this weekend. Good to be home.
It's a great day in
God. Im so tired. And sick. First im hot and now im freezing.!
I found the smoking section of the gym..I'm developing asthma from the 2nd hand smoke coming off the baby phat valour jumpsuits around me
Then may you be overwhelmed by the fact that this God loves you enough to give everything for you.
Remember what you do everyday counts!
Thanks to the new Granite City Brewery in Troy for listening.
Kingdom Life Fellowship Church meeting this Sunday for the first time at WVSU JAMES C WILSON UNIVERSITY UNION 10:30am!!!
#POW lol RT #Sagittarius signs are nice until their not... And when their not you need to get out of their way.
Hello Denver!
You know what I havn't said in a while?Cockblocker. Okay, I feel better now 8^)
wanted you to know and I referenced you twice in a presentation today.
RT : Cool --> RT : Google Superbowl Commercial made with screen capture +6 million visits. say
I think being in the creative business makes photo ops ten times better. Glad to have changed the mood :) have an awesome day!
This rain makes me even more desperate for summer -.- can't wait!
I'm not moving guys. Sheesh, I was jk lmao
I'll be sure to let him know that you enjoyed the show!!!
to live the golden rule - "Try everyday to do one kind act. When it's become routine, up your game to 2, then 3, etc" Karen Armstrong
Wow...Bar Harbor, ME is the New England version of Gatlinburg, TN.
doing wonderful.
which girls?
RT : Work satisfaction (or lack thereof) definitely affects how open someone will be towards learning.
yea but u been dodgin ur payments
follow , you'll be alright lol
RT #Follow for DC/VA #Apartment Info in #Redskins Country!
How long does a harp stay in tune? About twenty minutes, or until someone opens the door.
it's NOT a warranty issue. I'm idiot who lost part. Fine. It's about politeness, service, openness. RIM flunks on all points.
who are you with?
she had no focus or a clue....just crazy
was joslin asking for an autograph?
I think of more as the Forrest Gump of DH.
Word of the Day: Microwait- Consequence of the lunchtime rush for the microwave in corporate settings.
a gorgeous day in central park, strolling from lunch at via quadronno to the met.
Lol! *followed by crying*
Will it teach her to drive? (When I was a kid, my dad HID Car Wars from us, because it wasn't how you really drove a car.)
I need to start the next chapter of my life .. Asap
The hunger games trip today.
Sora's off Sunday :) sorry I didn't text yesterday my phone died at noon
I'm in charge of tomorrow's Program Team meeting. Anyone have a bell & mallet I can borrow?
Huh I swear I'm Fina snap at cousins sub n dey fuckn Mic dnt wrk
Richmond is top Youth Soccer destination in the country.
Thanks for RT- what are you excited about this week?
The SIXERS won ! See ya Bulls .. Haha
that's just how they do!
.... Happy New Year to you too, OC Gal!! :D
In a couple hours I will be living about 4 hours away from Austin. <33
I know! Who knew this was around?
Thanks, Pal!
Am realizing that my race outfit is noticeably devoid of tutus, silly hats, and trash bags.
Can't wait to dress up like LEPRACHAUNS and get genuinely weird with my boys
Our 40th Anniversary is on Dec 3 and 4. Enter our Maui Mall Memories Photo Contest or our Keiki Art Contest. Call 877-8952 or 871-1307.
From what I've seen in tributes, Steve Jobs inspired more people than Elvis did. Wow.
that new meek mill goes hard tho !
It'd be awesome to see you at THE PUB on Broadway today. will be there with , 5-7pm doing our NASCAR Game Tourney
Shailene Woodley likes DNA imprints at the Golden Globes
I Remember being a little kid watching the sabotage vid on MTV and jammin out and rappin along with the beastie boys.
Question of the night...What makes a sex addict a sex addict??? Tried Tiger but he didnt answer his phone ha ha
Come at me bro!
But I want to hear all your other comments!!!
Quaker! “: Cedar Rapids smells like chicken.”
Say my name, say my name.
Haven't heard from this girl all day
I can't stop fangirling over Say Somethin. Omg.
Sleep~ I wants it right now xD
I'm sugar and spice and everything nice. But if you want to mess with me, you better think twice!
Be safety conscious. 80% of people are caused by accidents.
#govchristie #mayor cory booker great you tube video
cool. Thanks
Thank you #Irene! my flight for #df11 is officially cancelled.
Taking notes... 😁 RT : she spends 5 hours a day tending to her face....
well thanks! I appreciate that!
'Sometimes God says, "No, wait." This is very difficult to accept. We prefer, "Yes, now."' Bill Oudemolen
baby steps!
Hell yeah! Great matchup! is one of my favorites!
yeah they the worst !!!!!! we should make a hit list!!!
Are you posting a card today? We are fiending!
Chicago I'm back!
Mostly just smirking.
Come on down and get some FRESH PRESSED JUICE!! We will also be bring our NEWEST PRODUCT, so come on down and see what it is
Whomp whomp😲 Guess its bedtime! Whoa tomorrow is Friday! 😉
oh no you di-ent!! I'll be looking for it!
With HubSpot, PDS has been able to more easily understand how its website is generating business
Love it! RT Google’s Best Benefits: The Top 7 Perks Google Offers Employees: tmblr.co/Z9Q5axFjKs1O
Tom ask ur guest about the effect of the corn subsidies and sugar consumption
that's what I was saying to the bitch that's what I mean by jumping ship
nice HU that was awesome!
Do I need to push my boundaries out more? …ah well, it's dinner time!
I definitely wore the wrong shirt to work today
That's awesome! See you there! :)
So, do not drink when you drive and do not drive when you drink
Just joined twitter and it's very exciting, and the goal will be to keep this professional rather than yet another time waster.
Yep. Florida rocks! Not many of us natives though.
Abeg this California King bed too big o... lets switch to NY prince bed maybe it will be better jare....
Beat THE Heat BuckS
Full off of a avocado, an apple & peanut butter. would be proud!
They wish they had ur richrs, girlfriend!
HEY TAX PROS! Pre-register now and save $129 at the IRS Nationwide Tax Forums. For a limited time only. Visit www.irstaxforum.com
So, we're heading to #chicago... Is it a museum or let's take a boat tour and sightsee kinda day in #chicago today?
RT : I bet the song in the Internet Explorer commercial got more downloads than Internet Explorer
ITS 9/11 HUH IM SO LOST FORGIVE DASTREETZMUSIC TO EVERYONE WHO HAVE LOST AN HAVE NOT LOST LOVE ONES TUNE IN TO THE 911CEREMONY
also, sad you're having trouble finding a place ):
what's good pimp
GO BERRY WHY AREN'T YOU OPEN
ahh, so funny - I saw 's post about gorgeous photo - and thought she was speaking of the bed one. HappyNY, M!
Tonight I'm getting faded tho.
Aye buddy. I hate you. RT a Faygo bottle.
Google Releases Chrome 15 and Web Store Redesign
... so you didn't chime in and stack your claim? ;)
“: Destiny's child song cater to you= a true companionship....I really can't wait to be able to give&receive that feeling”
I ain't gone lie California is the shit women and money wise drugs I don't know
“: These bitches will say ANYTHING for a follow, even if it degrades them” REAL💩👌❕❕❕
www.kociradio.com instrumental blues: Freddie King, BB King, Joe Louis Walker
how about you come here and bring me some coffee
What a great day, preparing for a week of phone conversations about how to drop the expensive cost of Findlaw or Lexus but keeping great SEO
What!! Losing followers.. Not cool, bro.
I didn't realize until now how much comic reading I did as a kid. I spent hours with Garfield.
Keyboard Cat wins the Pulitzer Prize
RT : I am where I am because I believe in all possibilities. -Whoopi Goldberg
Sounds good! Srsly, though, website looks great!
right on - DE librarians rock the virtual support!
I just unlocked the "First Lesson" badge on !
Yep! RT : Would u dye your hair or cut off 8 inches for Vogue? , , , and
Justin Bieber Hangs Out With Lil Wayne [PHOTOS] -
Working on writing some great stuff! www.starlightstudiosorlando.com
Watching "Taking Care: Family Textiles!" Happy Preservation Week!
Traveling tip: If you're passing through Long Beach International, grab a muffin. They're really good. Okay. Carry on.
tx to the 4HB i dropped 8 minutes in my marathon - I ran a 3:14:56 this wkend - 4HB is for everyone, endurance athletes included!
yep. it was.
HAPPY HALLOWEEN!!! Seeing , , at Frankies!! All ages,$15 at the door. Put your costume on & let's go!!
Why does have such addicting music?! Haha fell asleep last night while listening to Stars Align :)
This Studio Session
Zen masters pointed to the mind. They didn't like to talk about it. - Bill Porter, Zen Baggage
Truth for anyone is a very complex thing. For a writer, what you leave out says as much as those things you include. -Jeanette Winterson
C3PO-Sir, the possibility of successfully winning #megamillions is approximately 175.7 million to 1. Han-Never tell me the odds.
IPads, streaming internet, even cars and TV's!!! 200 years ago We'd be witches and warlocks!
it's small...but it's something 😉
Elliot is so gay hahaaha. He is posting really retarded stuff on facebook LOL
Got my permit. Excited.
RT : I wonder what the numbers would look like if you included labor and the arts in this study?
don't you mean... don't keep on f*cking your ex's too? oap
Mini nap b4 work
a roger waters fan, too? be still my heart!
Looking forward to meeting all y'll in September.
Y'all should check out EMP! It's the crazy colored. twisty building right next door to the Space Needle : )
I just got my invite to Wave!! finally.
great meeting you tonight!!! Btw...I'm stealing your purse:)
very excited to see you two in Atlanta!!
i love you babe.
MT : "Don't just get involved, fight for your seat at the table. Better yet, fight for seat at head of table." -
It's raining hard dab
Are you ready to take your promotion efforts to a higher level? Need more responses from your campaigns?
~Thx so mucn.....have a great weekend!
didn't know you were referring to a product. Definitely agree! :)
I feel like I got punched in the face by Perhaps it was my own doing.
Congrats Lyle!!! Owen is very handsome! So happy for you!
was prom fun?
It is you! Hope you are well.Been a long time.
hahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahahhahahahahahah, why do you say that?
far from
“: my excuse is "YOLO" for everything” toxic shock syndrome?
Why do people find it hot that I'm French German Scottish and Irish? O.o
wait, that didn't come out right. You know what I mean.
Following the drumbeat of the Self isn't easy. Practicing asking my mind to follow & serve, rather than race worriedly ahead.
Totally agree. Accountability seems to be a lost art and I have no problem with coaches demanding a little.
Settle down. I tried to re tweet but couldn't never trying to steal credit wasn't enough space to credit.
yea but I think he meant be a crossover
Praying helps everything(:
State bound tomorrow yay
Back at work today cant wait till Friday go back to Chicago n see my daughter
i hope you like their music(:
COME TAKE ADULT LATIN HIP HOP CLASS ON FRIDAYS!!! THIS FRIDAY...CLASS IS FREE
thank you for the great concert at the House of Blues in Chicago!!
Awesome picture! Thanks for sharing Patrick! RT my first trip with great service!
He shall cover you with His feathers. We thank you Lord for divine protection everyday. Be Encouraged!
Doors open @ 7 downstairs & show @ 8!!! So we can prob get down there to secure Spot around 7:30?? And It's a sold out show 2!!!!
oh I'm working on the awesomeness. Thanks for sharing with me =) You seemed to have plenty to spare ; )
The habit of writing begins with establishing the habit of beginning the writing. Start with that, and you'll be pleased with the results!
I have one thing to say to you. "Run Forrest, run!"
There are some causes that I'll NEVER get behind, no matter what anyone says. One such example? "SAVE THE BEES!" Hell. No.
I believe in a long, prolonged, derangement of the senses in order to obtain the unknown. - Jim Morrison
Too all whom have had a Reading from me or taken a Tarot class! I need Testimonials for my new websites!! thanx in advance, Rick
You are never a loser until you quit trying. Mike Ditka
can't wait! Will be glad to see you there
interesting point Newt just made about not allowing Romney to focus attacks on one candidate
Vannesa Hudgens can't sing for shit!! I don't know why she even tries. She sounds like a dieing cat.
Ima stop tweeting bc I never get a RT, Tweet or Follow
emotions can go die
I was going to tell you your hair looked great at meeting today! All I do in the front of the room is creep on my sisters.
sigh. i will need coffee again tomorrow.
My back hurt hopefully I call fall asleep comfortablely in front of this tv
Happy mothers day to some of you
true true lol
I've never watched The Walton's before, but today I've watched 3 hours of it, not including the movie which I also watched.
Blessed to be with !
Be sure to place your EL order before our 10:00 am deadline! Check out the menu & place your order at www.EpicureanGroup.net
Take a look at the February Portland Marathon newsletter. Send us your pictures of where you wore you PDX marathon shirts and be...
HAHAHA. No. Left it at work. Breakfast of champions.
Bama cheerleaders are huge
LOL, will keep you posted.
Hey thanks a lot for the Shout out! it really means a lot
Hey everyone! Follow my dad best father ever
Still, really want a nap.
GUYS! I GOT ULTIMATE VIP FOR LOUISVILLE!!!!!!!! -JANIE
idk... ur musical taste is lacking. I mean, this is good ol fashion rock n roll
You on a role tonight with that cute stuff. 😊
This Friday needs more
I know that I’m worth the wait, if you can’t wait and be patient for me, then I know that you’re not worth it
I just saw a guy wearing a beanie and gloves... I know it's not 80 degrees anymore but dude come on
starting a photography blog...stay tuned
oh it was out of the ordinary here too!
Bananas for fruit salads will keep their natural color if sprinkled with powdered sugar or lemon juice
followed! n sure i'll try my best(:
absolutely! Beautiful!
- this fone so DUMB
good job today boo, how'd it go?
I have over 20 of his books! He's 1 of my favs. I went to his #BeTheChange conference a few yrs ago. Have you looked at his history
is a coward!
What purrs along the road and leaves holes in the lawn? A Moles Royce.
Get a free report of real estate market conditions at www.atlanta-home-sales.net
I'm following Andrew Breitbart on Twitter. What is the proper etiquette when the person dies? Do you un follow the person?
At seaside kickin it but the beach in Amariahs car
very exciting!
Vitamix is DEFINITELY better than Blendtec! I'm in love.
I miss you jess come back girl!!!!!!!
SHOT in the DARK! Photo SHOOTS! You and yours at night! SPECIAL PRICING!
same here!! what should our icon and bg be???
no your not
betch answer your own god damn cousin
is anyone else's DM tripping out ?
Son, I always assumed you had sex with your bathists...I know I do. -grin-
I got it as a gift but haven't read it yet. I hear it's amazing! (and addictive!)
Sitting in Kreayshawn's dressing room, she's drinking milk... Who knew?!?
Loving this oral history project!!!
Thundercats Marathon on cartoon network! Working hard & hardly working
Aeeeww no thank you :) really I appreciate you as a friend !!!! Muahszzz
hence the goggles right?!?!
Grace, I've been to the Eames house. <3 that it's cluttery and lived in. Also, a friend of mine used to work w/the Eames'!
i hope that you know it , you are growing and for us is very emocional , and will never leave you ! we loveU8
omg i dont even know why i'm on this account i didn't realize it till now...bye!
Post office and BullFish are open!
#ReplaceAMovieTitleWithPenis... Get him to the penis.
> Thank you! Have a fantastic weekend!
On top of the Empire Hotel for Nautica...look for pops of pink, tailored separates and nautical stripes this spring!
ROFL. You rock
Up and rolling since 0400.
HOW FREAKIN ADORABLE!!!! I wanna name her....MAHANA!!! :D
I dont think so.
Anothher days work : Helping with her metal work (decapitating people, worshiping satan, carving pentagrams in forehe ...
My kids' idea of a hard life is to live in a house with only one phone. - George Foreman
S/O to the gym door for fighting back against me and
You could always hire a consultant to teach the teachers, based on school policy and best practices.
You’ve got to get to the stage in life where going for it is more important than winning or losing.
Looked awesome!
If every US household replaced 1 bulb w Compact Fluorescent Light bulb, it would prevent pollution to = removing how many cars from road?
Girls are always scared cause they always think their guy will find someone better than them.
happy friday to you! We are doing well! Happy to finally be open and serving the community delicious meals!!
Thanks for sharing, Jodi!
First Impact Denver class is meeting upstairs...I know they are all amazed at their colleagues!
Get your hail damaged vehicle repaired now! Insurance doesn't pay if you you can't show proof that your previous hail damage was repaired
sounds like me last night! You have my sympathy.
Thanks for shortening my tweet, twitter.
Just walked off the stage in Douglasville, Ga!
but God is the One Who should have dominion in the heavens!
NOW you decide to follow me?! It only took a night at coyote ugly to finally make it Twitter official we're friends? Ha:)
thanks karine! you rock! we'll be posting new songs soon so keep it touch with us!
Frankk Ocean! thats all i got to say..... lol
LOL, Night Night
I feel better. I felt I win. My last update is so effective!
#wewontworkout if your not
Starting a pizza joint, doing a little research - what's your idea of the perfect pizza? Or just share your favorite topping combo with me!
gotta take my car in today...but i'm glad its my day off
Yay I can't wait to see the dictator tomorrow! 😂😂😁😝👍
I see you and Kemba doing you're thing! Congrats on the win bro!
Classic vanity play is buying a magazine/newspaper: Facebook co-founder Chris Hughes buys majority stake in New Republic...
Headache still here.. Gonna try these meds one more time.. Back to sleep for me..
got bitches galore.
class acts!!!
I will
i appreciate it (:
Which local mascots would you like to see at my Birthday Party on April 14th?
accept criticism ..
Boxwire #BizTip: Your customers are human just like you. Give them a reason to come back and have an out of this world experience!
I want to throw a dinner party where I get to introduce/describe my dishes like they do in the food network
FOLLOW ME BACK:) 42
I hate bitches that where make up I like mine natural That make up fuccing talks face up that's y you gotta put more and more on every time
Record 90 plus minutes. Sweeten audio on edit day one. Edit down to about 60 minutes on edit day two. Post.
Being this bored in geom. <<<<<<< watching paint dry
I just bought Scott tickets to a game in April :)
#Ben&Jerry's has a red velvet cake #icecream - yum!
My grandmas getting surgery tomorrow. 😔 I hope everything comes out good. 🙏
Shogun Lunch! One hour!
Nice to meet you! Keep in touch w/ us!
#its2012whyyoustill gettin boyfriend/girlfriend's names tatted?!
Nice, thanks. Who knows, I could find it.
i mean i suddenly see some random thing
Adelante! Mexico's Largest University Makes Its Publications and Course Materials Freely Available Online - Global -… t.co/d01Koe5n
US Bank is NOT customer friendly when your stuff gets stolen!
I'm applying for the summer scholar program! Keep an eye open for my app!
RT : CNN Money ranks Santa Fe as one of America's Cleanest Cities per the American Lung Association giving the city top...
#RHONJ time. TV is fantastic.
Great meeting you:)
it's all good, we out here getting it one way or another
RT : So, who used the #recycling containers downtown #Indy this past weekend?
How spoiled are developers to work in an industry where, when we see a site we like, we count on clicking on the "jobs" link in the footer?
never color coordinate clothes with another man
LimeWire is considering filtering out pirated content and is hoping to strike a deal with the music industry to be able to sell downloads.
Funny show tonight.
Can't wait for Friday's episode! I hear you're the recipient of the Christmas visitor...
Tweeting late at night means piles become poles. I must admit that "poles of work" is an interesting notion. Perhaps even painful.
Once you go Skyline, you'll never go back... Granted, it's not Texas chili, but still addictive!
The Tide sure is rolling today! Hoping the Gators can come back and WIN the SEC Championship!
People don't mess with me because word on the street is I own three swords
this subtweet is for one of my followers who can get it. okay actually no its not lol just thirst
Seattle, baby, time to let a little sun in before one of us says something that they'll regret.
Mixed messaging. “: Inbox: '100,000 Endangered Species Condoms to Be Given Away for Earth Day'”
coldplay helps everything
Happy Thanksgiving Cincy Turkeybowl guys. Please tweet any injury or hangover stories. Or, what did last night.
Thanks -- yep, 7 years ago. So sad. But thanks so much for your well wishes. Tell your mom how much you love her :)
#Packers Nick Perry LB USC! We need HIM
people need to know when not to put stuff on the internet. it doesn't just go away
Peter can't be trusted with the sale of the house.
I haven't talked to in like.. 8 days :o ...
Here we go!
DAILY DEAL: Ellen Degeneres - Here & Now (DVD)
and nearly $70,000 raised tonight at the charity event.
“: If I ever meet Nathan, I'll Pick him up, Then runaway screaming "YOLO" hahaha
This burger >>>>
I want to work for Major League Baseball
honestly, I don't even know what a friday or a 420 means
why did that one girl like my status on Facebook. she just needs to get out
Gonna make my boo feel real special later ;))
yeah buddy! Haha to bad you have before..
o im from NY brooklyn but do u look like lil twist or well u no wat i mean
Nice of you to leave him in peace. Probably the best chance he has to feel "normal".
So...WinterJam2011 is stopping in the Charleston, WV area...Jan. 8th...who else will be VIP at the show besides those who win the raffle???
Showing 7 properties in Fed Hill/Riverside Park today. Hoping for less wind than during yesterday's tour of Canton/Fells Pt.
Promo video tomorrow! Let's go Vixens!!
thinks KBCO might be the nicest radio station in the world.
I just wrote a song to my cat.
: Online #poker has bipartisan support in Congress. The Payroll, Unemployment & Medicare Committee should back this!
Time for bed.
Wrapping party with the Luvvers for our two families
thanks for following! Be sure to also follow too!
Peyton did you like our poster we made for you !?<21(:
Will be impersonating a perpetual motion machine for the next week
After seeing The Avengers, I've determined Black Widow needs her own movie.
Just go ahead and put your man card back in your purse where it belongs. (;
Thank you! And I will post pics for sure! :)
ah! gottcha ! so you were referring to yourself ;) Who's the lady ! You can DM me if you don't wanna go public ! I am V discreet
so if that's true (sounds nuts, btw) then they succeeded in dividing people by class. Because most of my friends are p.o.'d
Learn to appreciate what you have, before time forces you to appreciate what you had.
Watching "Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer" with Reagan.
Efforts are being made by a certain Latin hottie. We'll see.
Watching && on TinyChat:D
This year we celebrate our proud traditions, values and principles that earned our movement an indelible place in
Strangers treat me better than my own "friends" I should prob go ahead and evaluate who's in my life
To tired.
The outcome of any serious research can only be to make two questions grow where only one grew before.—Thorstein Veblen
not you too:/
Nice Running into Jenny, can't wait to set up Brad's personal fashion show so he can show the country your fine wares!
ok, so gotta finish Sons of Anarchy season 4, watch all of Dexter season 6, then embarking on Fringe, from episode 1. Lots of good telly!
Made top 10 at DECA State competition in Food Marketing
Attorney Business Dev: Become a trusted advisor. Clients want to know you feel their pain and care about their problems and concerns.-JW
Aster cafe has bas service. 2 bad experiences there. Don't really want a 3rd.
Srsly turned off the outdoor lights and could still see trees, not shadows, down the street
Office drama!!!
Randall-"our children and grandchildren believe this is the best there is." make small changes every day to make the world a better place.
Drove bike into a wall of poison ivy as a kid - nothing happened. Moved an oleander flower 1 inch today - foot, face, arms blown up. Remedy?
It's more like Tuscany Chicken Tuesday instead of Taco Tuesday! La Prima is busy busy!!! www.wausautogo.com
Hashing out a Puget Sound Civic Communications Commons w/lots of good folks etc. & other partners to come!
lol u know I'm serious about mine
": I use Gmail's "star" function for emails that need to be followed up on. I'm starting to hate it." --> Me too!
Ugh, can't sleep. I have an interview at ten and im up on twitter lol.
that's what I thought... I'll consider canceling your beat down if you pimp us to your friends.
Nothing makes me happier than walking up to my car and finding a note on it. Shoutout to for making my day better after that test
I'm sleepy but I don't want to sleep
Or you can just become a #bengals fan and find out first hand! u do realize you got my hometown dawg
YES RT : Going to a Ted Nugent concert/hate speech today... Do you think a pro-Obama t-shirt is a good idea?
why doesn't Andie Graph in the android market support Ginger version ?
I need food w.e a mimir <3
your Nickleback trick didn't work. Line at Haileys = damn! Time for plan B
white and liquidy i get it
can't I do both?!?
sloppy joe. no cookie
im watching right now....
are you alive?
Changed my Tumblr url fuck ya finally.
hey cutie
When you're playing a game on your phone but forget to turn the sound off but don't notice because you have your ipod in AWKS.
And and above 80s on my precal test and quiz. Holler!!!!
Looking to hold a company retreat or off-site meeting? Our octagonal barn has an opening on 10.22.10, call 503.693.8452 for more info.
“: HATE West Town Mall. Too many damn Belk stores ... so confusing!” <-----Truth!
yes as do I but fuck these coaches that play games like this no class at all!
Working on a script about a double transplant gone terribly wrong: JAZZ HANDS!
and u know this man
It's sad when your so called friends let their friends steal your stuff!
The avengers Dbox in 3D for $10 yeah,? Heck yes I'll go!
'katie if you were black , you'd look like Rihanna' you would .
That White Mink Coat was a ShowStopper Da Truth
awesome....u deserve it
#ireallywant to get my tattoos already
Hold it down for the Bay, reppin' OAKLAND!
Need a legal document served to a Registered Agent in Chihuahua, Mexico.....CALL US!!! 877-527-5737
500k kids in Haiti can't go back to school. Join me & and donate RT
If you know me you know that i rarely give up on anything. I fight for what i want and I succeed.....for once...I'm tired of fighting
re: I thought that was odd too. Who cares if the misspelled something? You know what she meant.
It's not what goes in your mouth that defines u; its the words that come OUT
Pepper tonight at SDSU - free for SDSU students. What a deal.
Hey if you in da city monday, stop by HOLLYWOOD IMPROV 4 sum MLK DAY laughs, i got you A table, OG BIG SPIKE
NES Financial is currently at 66th Annual Convention!
Big thanks to and Catherine for decorating my car while I was at work.
Judge Ana Espana on Sweetwater TRO case: "These are adults talking to each other. It's distressing to hear these words from parent's mouths"
": I feel about Anchorman 2 the way many teenage girls feel about Catching Fire" Samesies #RonBurgundyismyPeeta <3
Sorry followers, if you got a message that 'someone is posting bad things about you', its a scam, don't click it, change your PW if you did!
Having your class in the hall #likeaboss #clevage (;
Oh my. I have about 3 months of my life I can't account for due to streaming Lost episodes on Netflix. Love it.
Thank you! You made my day. It's greatly appreciated.
God gave me u 4 the ups and downs god gave me u 4 the days of doubt 4 when I think I lost way there r no words here left 2 say god gave me u
you are equating your disagreement with #Occupywallstreet w/lack of clear message. and no i am not responsible for other's words
Not a good Friday for Tiger...
Loved last night with my two boys. Xoxo.
I loves all my followers :]
bestie I missed you! Hope you're doing great!
Is this Kentucky team better than the John Wall & Demarcus Cousins team?!... I THINK SO!
Do for me and ill do for you.
Turbo Tax. ugh
She will be loved.
As long as Tebow remains humble, NY will not get the best of him. He might help change the mindset of NY media.
Lol! Thanks! one of these days I need to change it up but I get lazy about that kind of stuff
U inspired me at gym today. Did ur push ups from my knees with the kick up at the end. Hopefully my end will kick up soon : )
Hi WRASTeam! We sent you a copy of "Pluto" by Twintapes! Did you receive it? We'd love your feedback! www.twintapes.com Tks!
Looks like other people have the same issue at processing step. No luck so far.
Tonight! Fremont Bicycle Clinic Fundraiser! Get your bikes cleaned and tuned for donations- plus stay for bands, prizes, and fun!
I think it's hard to get noticed anywhere. Customers have so many choices!
you'll be in my heart too <3
I <3 working Saturdays....
I rarely watch golf. However, when mom is here we do. Tiger just left course.
Don't mind me, I'm in love with the characters I create.
Fake people <
via "All cruel people describe themselves as paragons of frankness." -Tennessee Williams. Think about how you message to others!
Tonight, I'll be on the roof.
Haters make me famous.
Just finished the Charmed series absolutely awesome!!!!
send it to my email and ill check it out and let you knw!! In box me
you are by far one of my favorite people to follow.
sounds like a plan to me.
and his "dazzling eyes" :) #flipped #followme?
RT : I’m miserable. I can’t sleep in this lonely bed.
We pause today in remembrance of the lives lost on 9/11 and hope for comfort & peace for all on this tragic anniversary.
"R. Smith was exhausted , that's why he shot an air all ". Pitino
I think I'm ready to just retire! At age 28.
i really luv this song im not surprised its at #31 its an awwesome song
Man she is b..a..double D mane #NuffSaid shawty got the
Indeed! What does it say about me that I like it better than Bedford Falls? Guess I like to be where all the action is.
$PASO Keep this stock on your watchlist this week alot of accumulation goin on.
Protester sign: You don't know how many hornets are in a nest until you disturb it
Is Steve Martin your dentist?
I would love to listen to a podcast that is all about the world of G.I. joe universe just saying :-)
Real thugs moisturize before bed. You're looking at a real Thug.
Definition of Statistics: The science of producing unreliable facts from reliable figures
No one? No one wants to see a picture of my crush? bro. he's super cute.
I DON'T REGRET ANYTHING. But I've made a lot of life changes to better my future.
Olympic swimmer whose movement was 'like a feather in the water' - Irish Times
Lawd they done posted a clip of Dorothy Norwood singing "Brick House" Icant smh
We have a solid API to develop against, but it would still likely be a good-sized project.
Wow! Brittany thanks for the shout out! Can't wait to see you Sat at the #CommunityARTreach event for !
punch my ticket cuz I'm ready to go. Snooped thru your YouTube video. Good morning Milly! Wake me at the next stop conductor
Cook me!
New menu next week!
Ari's Live Chat is Today! Who's Tuning in?! (: xx
Buying 3 cans of kayak for a dollar only to realize you still got ripped off <<<<<<
Demetria I forgot to tell you, I took this girls tampon today and threw it at someone.
okay and I will Skype you babes x
Love you!
“: it's been awesome to have at our school” it was "fantastisc" to be here!
#FF some fine folks at
AUSTIN PLEASE COME TO CHILE ISTHE OLNY COUNTRY OF SOUTHAMERICA IN THE LIST!!!! PLEASE COME CHILE LOVES YOU SO SO SO MUCH!!!!
A favor? I guess there is no risk as a bench guy. It's just odd. He was DONE with the Giants.
My nex son will be named Wolfgang. Just sayin...
In that sdgdhrhetahf kinda mood.
Chocolate chip....?
5 Beautiful Road Bicycles - 1 Woman - PhotosSelectismcom - road bikes women
My favorite skater is Lil Wayne.
thanks for all the retweets!!!
#OrlandoSec We need a mature infosec community in Orlando. Notice I said mature community, not mature members.
The President's Cup begins this week! Go Team USA!
yea we just need to get playing & as we go along we'll get to know them some people didn't like JC and nibbles in the beginning
Are you going to #NAFSA11? Meet our staff at booth 1810!
Best of luck on Friday the 13th! Stay dry!
that's not a diet, it sounds more like a weekend in a third world country.
the best way to ruin an apology is to not accept it... Then nut check the person.
Help organizers select #UPA2012 session meeting rooms! Please take a moment to complete the session SURVEY coming to you via email! THANKS!
"Our passions are the true phoenixes; when the old one is burnt out, a new one rises from its ashes."~Johann Wolfgang von Goethe LET IT RISE
At least now we can never be teen dads...or teen anythings..
If they're phony....
yes i think so too
Jamming to "Best You Ever Had" by John Legend with putting a smile on my face :))
HAHAHAH, he's eight! omfg, rina.. YOU GOT ME ROLLING.
Love this ! And w/ all this rain in #Miami, a rainbow would bring tons of #Happiness right now :)
Please follow me? I would do the best day of all, please.-02
#ConfusingThingsGirlsDo expect you to read their minds i dont have the ability to read minds only if i know what you where thinking hm...
#needmorefollowers then follow
#49ers All The Way
My kids tell me Season 2 of Gilligan's Island is more creative than #1, is in color & says "the Professor & Mary Ann" in the song. ICYWW
Bynum whines around and looks like he doesn't care too much. It makes me mad watching him play
Totally Agree. Twitter Spam Sucks.
Get head while im readin call that shit "FaceBook"
Saw #Avengers, a storm's raging, I have a whimpering dog sleeping on my feet and a talkative cat rubbing on my chair. Time to write.
You deserve your spot on How could anyone not love your personality :) So happy to hear you speak
Having said that, I think the #NYR WILL WIN IT ALL
Know that wishin on a star can turn yo life into a dream.
John Maynard #KEYNES~English ECONOMIST & Fabian #SOCIALIST~BRAGGED about promoting the~Euthanasia of Capitalism|RT |
thunderstorm in #Minneapolis right now yes
I have a feeling ur kind of biased tho then it comes to COD. :-)
S/O to all the women playing y'all position.
so you're sayin she ain't sexy?! How many beers till I'd smush
I'm coming home tomorrow I love u
off 2 Grassroots Fest!
Look back, remember, smile, then move on.
how r u babe
Oh ouch. I'm gonna go bowling then be in bed by 1...ish. I plan on returning my book and seeing what other options I have...
I really wish I still had all that Hawaiian pizza but I ate it all and there's no more. Damn.
": Oh, you're a guy that sends smiley faces to other guys in text messages? When are you guys gonna fuck?" LMFAO !!!! I died
supernatural!!!:D you!?;)
3 course Chef's tasting menu with wine pairing for only $30! Or hang out at the wine bar with 25% off wines and $5 starters.
Glad and I got to catch up with over lunch! We missed you !
nd ma name is megan:)
: ... Hey ! ... Hope to see at the party on Tuesday, June 14th at Sky Bar ... ” Yeap, I"ll b there!
Editing ... I LOVE you so...
lmao . entertainment of the Night ! ahahaha
Ron Paul showing his foreign policy deficiency and dangerous thinking! All you need is one nuclear weapon.
Thanks :) I'm ready, just nervous.
I pride myself on my geekdom, however the table at the Tea Smith reading Harry Potter in Latin is taking it to a whole new level.
's twitter game = lacking
LSU and ole who?
Good luck! i believe you can win!
RT Facebook is down. What am I supposed to do now, read a book? Life is so hard.
Reputation for g's
#NP Pixies - Where is my Mind? (Bassnectar Remix)
Ready for Friday! Every single roller coaster with the best franndd. 
Less work today and more time watching the crossfit games regionals scores.
Stunned by this planet.
that'll due.
looked at me bending over al practice lol
shower in your tears
“: working lol..also we're using ur gear in Que's new video soon”<-- Thats Sick Right There. When U Shootin
LOL my mom "you can plan your wedding but leave the math to me." budget? What's that?
Every time I check the Trending Topics I'm convinced that 90% of the world is mentally handicapped.
Who cares apparently no one!
OMG WE REACHED 200 FOLLOWERS (: ~Dana
Off day. Didn't even get gratification from whip cream. This is a problem.
It's snowing in Indianapolis... And I dont have a coat.
Why are my parents such party animals?
Check me out on Inside MMA on HD Net tonight during Bas Ruttens segment
Just started taking piano lessons:)
Does a high pollen count = a safety hazard? It should. You can sure cut a finger off midst all that sneezing. OSHA take note.
its actually amanda I'm making fun of so...
#20ThingsAboutMe I ain't one to show when i'm mad but if you're trying to piss me off on purpose, you'll see the side of me you don't want.
We own a travel agency, so we are always traveling!
#JayZSyncShow This is sick! More shows need to do this!
I just moved next door to HSE & I look forward to watching this season play basketball
potlucks @ work r always fun, irritating when u see the people that didnt bring shit eating up everything, more then the people that did!lol
RT : Ya'll Pay Win, We Play To Win mixtape/viral album coming. This will have to be on iTunes Homie
The beauty of a steady practice (Bikram) is that every day is a new day. Let go of the bad days, be present & have faith and patience.
Any #sportsbiz professionals located in NYC? Would love to connect in person depending on our schedules.
He was clearly out where was BV?
god i hope so
I'm just not feeling well all together
the new album is sick
2 questions please: Did you invent a new vacuum/air pressure and/or electromagnetic technology to defy gravity? And the 2nd...
i do. Haha
i dont know what that guy talkin about lol
True. Gotta make it work somehow.
never eating at taco hombre ever again.
I work with museums, and nonprofit performing arts orgs and theatres, but often times my essays could apply to individuals.
1st Call Out Congrats!
...I told you we are a family regardless. I love you so of course I love don Don and dj. Just need you to get better
I don't need Television I kno what's goin on left & right from FB & Twitter .
if you really want to learn the nerd side of beer, go to Goose event Hollander tonight. Youll learn a ton from a very cool chick
All the women watching #Scandal on my TL sound like black folk yellin at the movie screen at the theatre.
Momma, I understand why you're mad and I know it's hard to accept who I am and how I live..
HAHAHAHAHAHA MY MOM ASKED ME IF was bypolar i said no thts just his FRAND personality X)
LOL!!! I don't think I'd get this bank.
Greatest of all time! :-D RT:“: I love Eminem .”
I Love You Kimmy :) .
Ive been saying that shit for years, it tastes like a zombies ass after they workout
wait did i just insinuate you're a bear ... perhaps a teddy bear we all LOVE :-)
I'm such a big chicken that I can't even watch previews of scary movies without freaking out and wanting to change the channel! 😱😲😣
Anybody at the lakefront for tonight??
holy crap... I think u need to tweet more. I don't think you've done enough today. Ha! mkmk
It is so hot it's like 90 out here
which genre?
agree on "lead with what you do" but even stronger if sentence 2 is specific. signature pieces/collaborations? approaches to tech?
I saw a dead bird flyin through a broken sky
This was a tip from our Certified Service - no harm! :-)
For a pessimist, I'm pretty optimistic.
I would ask you to follow me but you already are<3 I love you. (:
What's up with all the high school cliques having the one blk goth dude with the relaxed hair? What the dudes deal?
Right thing, sure. Political sleaze factor would've been a LOT lower yesterday, though. LCRs are right on this one.
which city are you in?
what is the problem now
#longliveskunkhair huh. man how i've missed that
The word kill but the SPIRIT gives life if you don't have the HOly SPIRIT in your life
now ur buddy mr. wickett is on the yuni b bandwagon. give it time then it will be yuni b is horrible lol
Good God someone take a log off this Miller Park fire
there is a cute store on melrose. My best friend gets THE BEST tops there. She got me a couple. I have to get the name for you!
so...you're just NOW getting around to following me? LOL
Next off isn't till Tuesday!!! 7 days straight?!?! Freaking gah!
bring it on then! I'm ready!
“: Fuck a Bentley, fuck a Aston Martin, fuck a ghost! I just bought a house.. #smartlifedecisions #godisgood” agree!
Thanks new followers!!!!! Keep spreading the word! :)
That's the thing, if I was on home network, I'd be on one of my 3 MBP's.
Getting new and used spare parts for more build-ups..the start up phase..phew. Gotta stay hungry..and foolish.
and you got it on video
I really hope that crazy pizza mogul enters the GOP fray....
Lebron James MVP this season well deserved lets see if he can win it all this year
Hey just a random question, How many days was it til u got ur Bracelet?
Eli Capiluto doesn't "get it".
How can a man get raped ? That doesnt match up.
I love all the brick buildings in Chicago - always seems novel to me coming from Alaska.
I can't believe he has only hours to live & he's SEVEN years old. I hate you cancer :(
haha yes, i got it.
Sorry about the #Phish setlist feed last night.
Another new acting role! I'll be playing Amber, a pizzeria waitress, in Jannick Gluck's "The Map to My World" shooting next weekend.
Great table reading today. Future looks bright!
fair enough... When will we find out?
Hi Happy Friday. Thanks for the mention. :)
Happy Thanksgiving! #TurkeyTip If frying turkey place your bird in the pot and then fill pot with oil to avoid spillage of hot oil
DID YOU EVER WONDER... What came first, the fruit or the color orange?
basketball play was good, it's hurting now.
Winner! The Real Spango is our winner for tonights trivia. Great Job! Send a message here with your info & Design Choice
Mulled wine and chocolate cherry liquers. Yum.
Good luck on the debut !!
#FF is like one of the most interesting and funniest person to follow! <3 he always makes me smile and his tweets are so fun!
Go hard or go home
Montgomery Co. Maryland is under a tornado watch until 9PM. Please be safe and alert as the weather moves through the area.
What kind do you have? RT : I'm about to start a detox tonight.
He stopped talkin to me ..
I hate misspelled tweets-_-
happy Birthday .(:
Scags at 18 soon to be available as POD. Love the sound of that. Ask me where that will be.
ah it's so crazy to think about me from two years ago!!!!
I think pandering for the support of Donald #Trump is the most pathetic aspect of the GOP presidential season. #Romney should be mortified.
Let's go #ManchesterUnited!!
S/o to for tweeting the best #FuckinStoners quotes
And there in rehab again when the vikings STOMP OUT THE PACK!!!
Anything new your way Lynn?
Puttin up CHRISTmas decorations... It's that time again
Now go back home to Maryland where you were born and raised, Yankee fans.
I had THEE most detailed beautiful dream with you last night! Its a whole story!
still have paychecks to cash and shit
why does my phone run away from me sometimes? Phone, please come back. I promise to be nicer and keep you charged up. Just come home, phone!
Off to First Thursday! (via ) look forward to seeing you! Aaron will be taking the stage at 6:30...
ah thanks x
Mexican food is the best!
Wtf the first part of that tweet that I messed up didn't even go through!! But if you need help with photoshop i got you!!
#moversli available tomorrow for any size move. Have multiple trucks and vans on stand by. $210 for 2 movers and 16ft truck
u in the game please
It is possible for there to be a dance with life, a artsy response to its inbuilt limits and challenges.
nope too. Working hunniey (: wherre you stay ?
Max took care of him, which wasn't easy because his hobby was murder.
Happy Thanksgiving from the TAASK!
#mla12 #s442 Inanimate Alice as intro to digital narrative, paired w/Extremely Loud & Incredibly Close as way to teach rdg modes in tandem
umm... so people are biting off each others fingers now?....
RIP Steve Jobs - a true visionary...
hm how about April 2013?
Doctor Who returns tonight!
the Chi Tribune needs a source for a story on reckless driving. Please call me at (312) 337-7746.
To all my friends in in Hawaii and the West Coast....Be safe. I'm thinking of you. Bill Oswald in Hawaii-let us know you're safe.
MA--a new print but not a new cut.
Don't forget that it's about the relationships you make as well. People want a connection & SM allows for that
Today's #CovertTU word: LOOK-A-LIKES – decoys used to confuse hit squads and surveillance teams. I have many look-a-likes. Can't find me!
I've never had a boyfriend or a girlfriend, am I missing something? lol
no problem. n. taleb fan? dude is badass.
RT : How To Ignore Your Email Without Losing Your Job: Save time and be more productive by using these simple tips an......
Today's Sandwich: Turkey & co-jack on a croissant with lettuce, tomato, mayo & a cup of soup....$6.95
“: Our full platform, launching in May, will be nationwide by the end of this year! :)” very cool!
ya, they looked good... but lets see what guinness has to say :)
we will feed you and the other apples soon enough...we will keep u in mind when we're cruisin!
Learning the skill and try to build mineRT : How many of you are participating in PLNs - includes #lrnchat, of course?
Pop quiz: What do Stinging Nettles, Morels, and Sea Beans have in common?
Hearth, NYC - amazing food always, unfocused beer lists. The Bev. Dept finally blew me away w/ a special list of craft ciders (+10bt )
Well there will be some girls there who like both groups too. I've seen them on tv over the years.
I think your area would be Southern Illinois. We're climbing, we've been at 61 for a bit now in the Milwaukee area
Have you not been watching House? D:
Written in HTML/CSS w/ Markdown + Dropbox, and compatible with , I present to you my official site/blog (Not here yet due to IE)
Staying out late on a Sunday for live. Milwaukee's Sunday concert crowd is worth it. Man ponies and all.
We're back from our holiday break today! Come visit us and see what we have in store (literally!) for the new year!
Fraid I do not have Skype
preciate it.. followed back
In 5-10 years those guys will charge top dollar for their services.
Well, almost "do or die" time. Don't think I've ever been so nervous in my life!
Congrats Will. Now take out the garbage'.
aw fudge!! Now I gotta keep up w/ Missouri! Thanks big George, its not like I have enough to keep up with!! JK, good luck big man!!
FLES Teacher Ms. Vieyra addresses the Board first wearing RED!! She talks about measurable goals in FLES.
aint nothin like that gud ol' hangover puke lol if not then
Some people are the literal definition of "hot mess."
Check out the play running MASTERPIECES tonight & Sat at 8pm: You can't help but talk about it
Sup RT : RETWEET if you are up! Tweet me...
Hot damn, I love the Allman Brothers Band.
Back It Up, Then I Put It In Her Back Door
You're welcome. Looking forward to your tweets!
you be trying to fight too so! lol You told me earlier you just wanted to slap me... my feelings was hurt :( hahaha
thanks for the follow Travis!
We've got lots of treats and fun stuff to eat while you're here...plus, Tom the Woodchuck brings all of his handmade wooden toys & gifts.
Anybody in Atlanta? // MT : Police surrounding Frazer home at 3662 Wellhaun Rd in Decatur right now! Need people here 4 support!!
big ten basketball...grab as much as you can on defense until the refs call it. What happened to moving your feet on defense?
*raises hand*
Arts and crafts for my sisters wedding, biggest loser, and some
What are the four things that occur at a first appearance?
You're crazy man.
I know. Mine is usually half good and half random things that I'm not sure I ever mentioned.
Most important thank you to and Kristin Fasbender of the #NCAA for giving me the opportunity to volunteer this week.
A coffee shop (especially on a Sunday afternoon) is a locus of minute experience.
We are at Casa watching sassafaz sound check..shows about to start, come out for a great night of tunes in Athens!
Is Bill Hall playing for anyone today?
turtles are sexy. okay.
Having a great time watching football spring practice in Rochester.
meet up?
Let's quit this game before you start losing
Not sure why, but I'm suddenly missing several months worth of emails from my gmail account. :( I really needed some those, too.
So my mom voulenteered me to babysit again
Tired of games, i just want something real.
Check out the store for amazing art!!!
Nickleback+ NBC Sports=worst sports coverage ever.
This BART station smells like horror. Sweet, dirty horror.
Musicians have many of the same risks and stresses that an entrepreneur does.
very unfortunate indeed.
More superstar announcements tomorrow and every day this week!
The best toys at the best price can be found www.todaysfavoritetoys.com check it out!
checking out the AIPAD. Really strong work at love the piece by Sarah Anne Johnson!
thank you! just saw this lol
Day 2 of the Academy Awards Festivities "Governors Ball" Food and Beverage tasting with Wolfgang Puck
“: lol maybe so.” or Everyday is Valentines Day!! Lol
"my car" video#suckafree I'm down!
Hi there, thankyou for following
how ya doinq?
Ugh! I was looking forward to this time alone =(
Sitting in Thornton Center, studying it up!! Final tomorrow then Friday, Saturday to enjoy my last weekend in Tennessee for 2011!
Etiquette question: My beer is gone, husband falls asleep before finishing his. Fair game?
Ok even if no one reads it I'm still gonna post a new story!! So be prepared. (=
egotistic sent me!
I wonder how much the violence in Jamaica will effect tourism? My husband n I have trip planned 4 Sept. 2 Ochos Rios, plane lands n Kingston
Please see my answer on to: My child support commitment is about to end, what do i need to do? - You need to fi...
If I EVER get married I will be requested that no strippers are at my bachelorette party..this is scary
RT : What number is this, Chip? 7A! Okay, I mean it, don't get excited man, it's 'cause I'm short, I know.
RT : Have any questions for Zoe Saldana? Send your #AskZoe questions today!
A fire alarm is going off in the building, nobody even considers evacuating and I'm sitting here tweeting about it.
TRAFFIC - Crash - Fish Hatchery Rd @ Petra Place
Definitely reading that one. Thanks.
foster failure?
Sorry to hear that. Be well!
So annoyed
fuckin right??! That's just the worst, shit makes me rage.
Great lax game between Jefferson and apple valley! AV wins 9-8 in 4OT.
#angrybirdsspace...I heart you.
How was it tonight?
Spend time with family when home, not the shredder... Call A1 Shredding to schedule an appointment... Best prices...
i love my hubby Ezequiel!!!
the BBTF Cocktail party currently has a WAIT LIST for an invite. Send Name/Company/Title to
you already know polo all day hima u cant get fresh like me cause u dont have a girl well sorry to hear that
is looking forward to hopefully auditioning for roles on the television series Hawaii Five-0, Off the Map, and The Glades. Happy Holidays!
I respect the people that don't give a shit what others say about them.
Fucking lying professors seriously how the fuck do you give a take hone final that is due in less than 4days
You'd better more than think! RT I think ... I THINK there is a baseball game today. :)
I wanna come!
Astronauts who spend a month or more in space may return with potentially harmful changes in their eyes, says a new report-...
when's the last time you tied your shoes? since you wear Toms all the time...
Cause its feels so empty #WithoutMe! :D haha
Hope to see you in September after I've been unveiled.
yu got sum fire ready??
I JUST WATCHED IT AGAIN I STILL DIDN'T SEE IT
oh haha well in that case, thats IS stalkerish! lol i guess it makes sense though, if u go to their page to follow them
agreed. its a beautiful home.
I got 144,480 points while escaping from demon monkeys in Temple Run. Im so addixted to this. omg
Sammiches are my favorite food. Garlic bread is up there, too. What kind of sammich should I make on garlic bread?
i am a little insecure, a little unconfident, cause you dont understand, i do what i can. but sometimes i dont make sense.
kinda wanna go to drakes after party at zouk....
i realyyy want you to come to WISCONSIN again. meeting you was the best day in the world #codyjakeustream #goldcoastfinest I LOVE YOU
Good Morning Tweeters!
To do my homework or to not do my homework? Sorry
me and da homies still craccin up on that "GET OUT MY WAy" lol
lol i just noticed that
follow back love
follow our official account :) we also follow back on that one too.
i hate ricky he went from worst driver and alway wreck every week and jack gave him a 2nd chance and he like damn good, but talent driver
would anyone like a shoutout ? :D im in the mood for $h ! (:
Thank god for getting in my car yesterday.
been a while since I read the books but I'm sure it's as punishment for rebelling or something!
Caught the last 30 min of Junot & he was great!
Love when the rising sun turns all the clouds in the sky pink.
thanks for the follow
Dudes in high heels not cool but my dj Ross young is!
Well played today my friend. Thanks for jumping in! RT “: Always a great time with #GameOn”
Blood orange cider sounds good.
HELP, Still on the quest to fight a foundation that does not look pink/red/ orange on me in the sun FYI I have gold/brown undertones ideas??
RT : Looking forward to tonight! See u there
On the way home
what happen to the list you was suppose to be doing for me?
For RT: What is a friend? A single soul dwelling in two bodies. ~ Aristotle
Day 4 question: is it the cleanse? or is it food poisoning?
lol idk.. I might get sick of drawing soon (like I do with everything else) but hey it's been a year so that's a good sign!
You know you're tired when you wake up and are already planning on what time you are gonna take a nap
THANK YOU THANK YOU THANK YOU
haha nice, and cool ill see you there.
Lol you suck
better than the people I deal with normally
Thanks for the RT!
Why is it only tuesday.
please tell me it was a junior high team..
can't figure out what i'm more in love with--pita chips or screaming females
(thanks guys!) Trying like crazy to get the word out!
These Animal Cookies >>>
kindle version is more $ than paperback #throughthelookingglass “: Thinking it's time to re-read Made to Stick ://t.co/SjSwn6kY”
That's my pal Jessi. Looking forward to this! :)
We have ur back in Seattle all the way. U inspire me with ur talent & strong spirit. Keeping strong & rock it hollie style.
Macbeth essay = 6 pages, 7 paragraphs and around 1700 words. Watch my teacher give me a 'F'
I'd send back for help but the wifi on the ascent is garbage!
Please let your friends, family and associated kno that we are accepting paint daily for recycling! We need support! Please retweet!!!!!!
Intelligent, happy, and great taste in art
The collateral damage, of course, will be that fewer students who need aid to attend college will be able to afford it
With are hat on now, we are ready for the Holidays! Bring on your Christmas orders!
no but i have a full length viking coming soon
Gifted Rich & Young
y can't you make it this year? only a couple hours away
“: IM ON THE PLANE TO NEW JERSEY WITH GOING TO SEE AND AT PRINCETON <3" HALLA
Can we just go back to the old days? Please.
Wish I could leave my house 
hi <3 how was your birthday? :)
Subway station is flooded and closed. Great start to the week!
I know I have said this before but let me clarify.... Cancer REALLY sucks!
i miss you <3
So, the website says it's sold out. Did I need to get a ticket? I thought it was just a show up kind of thing.
big ben and marty on DP this morning? nice.
Challenging Richard Lugar is beyond me.....More nukes the better so when Indiana gets hit by an ICBM I'll blame it on tea time
I'm going to go do awkward things with awesome people. Or maybe awesome things with awkward people. I'm not sure yet.
Isn't there a slaughter rule or is that just when I drink beer and a play softball with desk jockeys?
life is too short for the bs..live and learn
Travel back in time for Groovy Science at the Francis Branch on February 2nd at 5pm. Ages 7 and up. Pre-register online or call 282-4641.
Lovers and lovers
Thoroughly enjoying a Mounts 2007 Petite Sirah: juicy, hottish (15.5%), black cherry, plum, orange peel, cinnamon with hints smoke and mint.
Ask them why we can't just select the 10 channels we actually watch and create a package out of that. Will that ever happen?
I've read that Pablo Neruda wrote 'If You Forget Me' about his exile from Chile. #FridayReads But...(1/2)
now it will be even better now that youre there ;)
Way to go last night Great game!
Those Gerstandts learn to fly their freak flags young.
THE SUN POPOUT LATE OFCOURSE I,M AT MY FRIENDS PLACE WATCHING THE GAME LOL.....
Anywhere good to eat around #melus12? Yelp's got nothing...
< well shid im rite around the corner,dont make me slide lol
No, that's
Awesome! #dogood RT Headed to Silver Spring for some volunteer work this morning. My soul needs this.
Yay! Please follow me!!
You're sadly mistaken if you think I'm into chasing.
I've realized that I hump my pillow at night. WAT.
Writing a pop song in my head as I attempt to avoid packing books. "Don't wanna pack, don't wanna pack. No no no." At least the tune's nice.
Thanks - it went well the 2nd time. Must have been user error the first time ;-)
RT : can't the brewers get better in game songs than violent femmes and the "day-o" chant?" - Like the Humpty Dance?
HA! So true. RT : A4: Mayor RT Q4. What is the best regular recurring comedy gig in town?
Had a great time playing w/ Del Fuegos ! Saw someone from the venue taking pictures, any chance you could send us some of those?
Picking up a box of coffee for my 6 hour labor negotiations seminar. Not gonna share.
Interested in short films? Then you'll love #KC Moving Images Wednesday night from 7-8:30pm at Studio B
sleep on it ;)
Tried to type Twitter. Instead typed Titter. Perhaps I ought to go mimies.
thank you babe!
The state gets to temporarily stop the previous ruling (that stops the previous anti-PPrule!) So square one, I believe.
Humble yourself daily before The Lord and He will lift you up-James 4:10
retainers? I always get nervous I'll forget them
love you to !
We can taste them already, can't wait!
Diggin the #SubtweetSunday by josh ripping apart his broder. #brotherlylove n'at
i know, it is dragging!!
My sister's family is wack. Except for the niece. She's a sweetie...
Today is day one of getting everyones number.
Hope is always available to us. When we feel defeated, we need only take a deep breath and say, "Yes," and hope will reappear.
Take it to the head..
Rick Bayless last night, John Besh tonight. I'm in foodie heaven.
College Basketball is all we really need. Does anybody even watch the pros?
thanks for the follow! There's sure to be talk on citizen diplomacy tomorrow during #futureofpd. What hashtag should we use to tag?
o ok sleep tight
After you've uploaded a vid go to your account page and navigate to my current vid, if your video is shown here then it's live
Who needs pumpkin pie when you can have Panettone? We are your Panettone Headquarters. Stop in & pick up a treat for your Thanksgiving host.
ohh i am curling it likr usual
"#T4StarsLive - Example.. If you could be any animal, what would it be and why? ps. I love you!! Fom Morag. :) x"
S/O to my brotha cousin
In Kuwait, honor killings are not criminal acts, but misdemeanors.
Dolphins in Malibu.... I feel blessed :-)
OPEN AUDITION TONIGHT!!!!! Email for more info on how to become a New York LADY Rebel!!!!
Love the snow... Way better than the rain, especially for my hair!!!
are my tweets protected? can you retweet my tweets? someone help! haha
Bad Girls Club Reunion part 2 !
Thanks for the follow! Looking forward to your info
Have not attended PNWA. I see that it will be at the Seattle Hilton this year. I may register - looks interesting.
#dailyfeedback Examples of songs whose meanings have generally being misunderstood. Results @ 4:20pm on 91.3fm.
it should stand for nobody agrees
great stuff. i deal with the dads/the men. lets link and connect! .
HAPPY 20TH BIRTHDAY TO MY FAVORITE PERSON LOVE YOU!
Happy Halloween! Be sure to get to 5 Points for the East Side pub crawl!!
Yep, still a packed house on Tuesdays. Who wouldn't want to spend their night listening to bad jokes around obnoxious "adults"
yeah I'm 18 and I am a little nervous...but mostly excited!
Oh okay. I always thought you were around here (NY)
u better stop that
We made it to Friday! Come raise a pint of our just-tapped double IPA or petite saison! Or both!
You have classic crack head potential
Thank you , for becoming our 200th follower <3
you'd better!
Love you!! saved the day! She answered the phone...love u figga!! xo
you were good though! :o
My poor doggie had a bad allergic reaction to something and theyre keeping her at the vet.
Balker who owns the transportation co taking your medical trailer to Haiti stopped by Sat 8/72010.
where is he??
Music is my soul, when i pass i hope i get to take it with me....(music im talkin about)
Community service.
thank you
is it beef jerky time yet?
Wow! Thanks! RT : Honored to be a part of #MarchforBabies305! Follow as we walk for healthier babies in Miami.
Thank you for following me on tweeter and add as friends yay!
oh i see, I really have no preference but ive heard the 3D isnt worth it
Visit our friends for their 2-year Anniversary Party today! Then come hang out with us for the afternoon!
You've got my vote. Better get your acceptance speech ready!
me too!!😡 lol glad I got to see you😊
with a gun???? That tweet frightened me. Lol
Tonights the night! at Vision Nightclub. Dont miss out!
We're hosting an showcase so unofficial it's in ny. Also it isn't real. Very exclusive.
Brb, hittin every puddle with
That's right. Let me know so I can leave your tix at will-call.
my momma b on sum trash
Request our new single 'Messenger' on your favorite radio station. If they don't have it by now, they should right? :-p
Finally home I been gone all day so tired 😔💤
RT I spent 1 hour doing exercise bike . 247 calories burned.
Glad to see you're a Canon photographer!
or whether or not they can get hired at Cinnabon.
Today's #outdoor #activites...the park and a game of chase in the backyard
when's the game now?
You dont relize how mad your makin me Cnbc...
Gonna kick butt on writing today then my reward tonight: William Friedkin speaking at directors closeup.
's cover of so sick from his ustream that he just done
Time for that Saturday morning workout!Took a few days off but I'm back! If you wanna loose weight or get toned get @ me!
JR Smith and Chandler both with 5 fouls.
I would take ARodg, Brees, Brady, Manning(x2), Ryan, Rivers, Big Ben, Schaub and Romo. Stafford if he keeps it up
I love her! that commercial is just far, far overplayed.
"A woman who will tell you their age will tell your everything." ~ Coco Chanel
Oh, good! What are you looking to cook with the duck livers?
I never had a problem with a grandma before until now
Up waiting for cox cable b4 I head to work, so sick of this bad internet connection...
Among the songs that my mom wants to copy from my computer is "My Humps".
finsihed a bag of Mike and Ike's delicious candy. NOW I am ready to shoot a hockey game.
Wow bad call clearly went off Harden
My pleasure Linda (MM)
go Finn! that's some falsetto!
Looked outside and was excited my last shoot for the day is out in the sun. Then I stepped out and was cold. At least it looks nice out :)
You know who put together a great Bob Dylan playlist on ? , that's who.
thanks for the tweet :)
Need a room while in Vegas? Don't forget about our $20/night poker room rate for just 4 hrs of play! Book now for the WSOP!
Accomplishing the impossible means only the boss will add it to your regular duties. Doug Larson
have fun Rob!
Chicharito's career is like Mexican women, they're only hot for a year or two max.
who's bday ? yours or his ?
new followers!!! thanks everyone
I shaved my playoff beard and take full responsibility for the loss. My bad philly
The bright side of the canvas
I'm going to SLEEP! I have testing again in the A.M.
should follow me :)
Denigration of female bodies is a political act not biological.
You are just the cats meow, aren't yaa?
DVR Alert: I will be on KY Newsmakers with Bill Bryant at 11 a.m. Saturday on
phone not on .... But I can get wifi were im at.... And I know his birthday Is cumin up....
update me on the football please, i haven't watched it whatsoever
hey now, dont be mean to riley. he's a pretty cool guy..
ok so that means u want to go in for me tonight right??
Yay Sister! My sister is going to be happy that i joined twitter, #no longer a tweet virgin!!
Thanks to all the students and faculty at who participated in our diversity workshop today!
cranking 80's radio on last.fm and learning about Responsive Web Design. Feeling pretty energized
Sorry. UR tweet isn't 'connected' to anything. What looks like a fake?
oh and i have farmers daughter
": If Denver trade Brandon Lloyd yea they want Tebow to fail.">WRONG. This is pro-Tebow cuz Lloyd speaks out in favor of Orton
well the dark looks sexy if you ask me. I've never seen the blonde lol
beautiful, universal church we have; that's 2 different prayer givers that barely speak english, but oh, the Spirit that was felt!
I need to stop falling for straight guys. It never has a happy ending.
While He's Growing Up. I'm Graduating From High School Next Year & I Am Going University.
Great finish to this game! I want OT!
That hypothetical tweet question brought to you by frozen margaritas from Applebees of southern GA.
Excited for this #BCAN Webinar right now - Planning a run/walk with for Bladder Cancer Awareness in May!
you find a new song yet?
Hey I stopped by last week. Didnt see YOU but great party!
who made you mad ? lol
It's why I'm one week shy of signing divorce papers.
"Ron Burgandy had never heard that song, so the fall was much worse..."
Cheers you hot ass boy!
R.I.P. Donna Summer
We're on the same wavelength! I'm in Portland today. Sorry I missed you! Let's talk soon...
Rick Santorium is now asking for donations to end his campaign debts. Just say no hand outs allowed.
TY RT Hope to see you at #BizMomsKnow Twitter Chat today :D
everyone is doing a public reply not DM so here we go #TheGreatest, 3634, 11.5
must have been a glitch in my iphone app for Goodreads - found it and rated it (5 stars of course!)
I didn't go to my friends house today #BecauseItsFriday but Austin didn't even do an austream :/ I don't think he ever will now
Hey who's idea was it to get a 6 am flight after getting back to the room at 2 am??
Thank you to Phil and Kobe for the championships AND being class acts from beginning to end! You will always be the best!
Can't find a apt:(
I cant think of anything clever to say... this is a
I KNEW there were Tiger fans in Oregon!
i am SURE it will be back for 13. hopeful that since it's entirely owned by NBC, it'll get 1.5 more seasons for syndication.
I want one but I don't think my mom will buy 1
I'm like 35-1 now
The fact that the texans are hanging with the ravens on the road with a -3 turnover diff and a rookie qb is pretty good.
Just got an email pitch on surviving your hs reunion by doing "17 Procedures to Look 17 Again." Lipo, lasers, tattoo removal, oh my!
CamMi saw your post on marriage, sharing your poems about marriage is a beautiful idea
Good afternoon everyone. I hope you are all having a wonderful Friday and a great start to the weekend.
Supt Karen Fischer-Gray holds up giant document of public comments. Everything in the plan affects kids & families, therefore schools.
miss you too! Let's go on an adventure soon!! Xo
#youwerecuteuntil I saw (;
Been staring at this beautiful fog over Lake Mendota at the lib. All I want to do is take photos, but instead I'm stuck writing my thesis :(
You’re very welcome! Which bar is your favorite to munch on? RT: Dear sunbelt thanks for the candy you call granola…
Is it bad that I like the chase better than the reward? #gah !
If you look at Twitter, FB, or surf the web at work, OWN UP TO IT. We all see tiny browser in the corner of your screen.
One more minute...c'mon Gunners!!!!!!
Thank you for the follow :)
Let's go to bayshore, dress like we just got done with volleyball practice, and spend money like it's New York.
PUT THIS ON ITUNES OMFGGG<3
all man baby all man
Help this new band to get up to and past 1300 followers a new and fucking amazing band at the loft poughkeepsie 9/30
thx for awesome link such fun! loved you on #TheMentalist killer facial hair made me laugh been a fan from
Not easy. I mostly speak to ideas behind form and how I see the buildings. There can be a warmth to them.
#YouKnowWhatAnnoysMe when u ask da same shit over n over n over
I Love when i goto twitter and i have a couple new followers :D makes me feel SPECIAL c:
Oh crap, would you know I work that day? Maybe I can get someone to switch with me.
Bread and butter, devoid of charm in the drawing-room, is ambrosia eating under a tree. ~Elizabeth Russell
It's not editorializing. We're not the ones raising the issue. Members of the community have multiple times.
Ugh, I want it to be warped already. 😲
I just left, I was at beer garden then cvp
Randy should go home before the rose ceremony. I'm already over him.
#ICSC will be offering 13 Special Industry Groups (SIGs) at #RECon12. Whatever your interest,
awww see you ain't right! okay i will help out in the kitchen but he's mine in the bedroom. you too young! <payback lls
jobby? If you want external validation on your pro/con list, please let me know.
"Work like you don't need the money, love like your heart has never been broken, and dance like no one is watching"-Aurora Greenway
Just had a meeting w/the folks over at - Excited for our upcoming/joint career fair April 10th! Great opp for job-seekers
#Heat losses are staring to feel almost as good as #Yankees losses. Let's go #Pacers!
<3 you guys so much! <3
"What care I how time advances? I'm drinking ale today." - Edgar Allen Poe
Nigga im satan's son
burned 250 calories doing 30 minutes of "Running 10.6 min mile with hills"
GIVE ME RIVERA
You can take what's yours, but don't you dare take what's mine.
": hey what's going on?? oh & I want to see Nia tomorrow- we'll be home
Job change in my future! Just handed in my notice.
Follow me back is a Sexy account related to Sex Dating ;)
Shooting ten pages a day.
got a dose of some wayward spirulina, eh? ugh. feel better.
Who's Hungry? How bout a Breakfast BLT.....ooh fried eggs, yum
Thanks for the tweet Terri!
Yes! I was just thinking how badly I need to listen to a new mix :)
Bitches are talking mess lol
are you sure ?
Had the best birthday thanks to amazing friends! :)
Awe! So proud!
When you wake up in the morning, what's the FIRST thing you think about?
At McDonalds last night the dude gave me the wrong flavored McFlurry. I threw it back at him and screamed back, "You McFUCKED UP!"
Thank you! We LOVE seeing old pictures, if you happen to have any!
lemme know when your here
thanks for the follow check out
BAM! “: how about a follow?”
Register by emailing or sponsor a challenger to help raise funds for #PZS2011 and get a crazy #zine!
Thanks for the mention !
I'm really surprised that a snow day was called today.
#p lalah hathaway naked truth, love her music
i made this account to support you! please follow me! im a big fan! <3 97
Probably a little fresher than Joel Chandler Harris Ass.
SXSW bummer of the day: Was going to see the Low Anthem, but just discovered they're opening for Bruce and I didn't win a ticket. :'(
They need a real wake up call. Bynum has run the whole gamut with me. From holy ish he's Dominant & better than DH to c'mon son
We gotta get on together sometime soon! (And play Mario Kart on the Wii again...that was SO fun! Lol)
very cool! Hope you have a great time!
did you bring snacks like I told you?
Don Cornelius (Soul Train) was pronounced dead today. Indications are that this was an apparent suicide. Pray for him and his family.
“: Swoon Friday”where at?
#VegasSpringSocial sounds like so much fun!
I don't need permission for the things I do. I do what I want, when I want.
Great Lakes history, Detroit as a maritime city, Louis XIV's swag, and Detroit's native Indian community.
I don't, but I'll keep you in mind if someone asks.
I'm watching Your Mama (6274 others checked-in)
While we may not be able to control all that happens to us, we can control what happens inside us. ---Benjamin Franklin
UGH! Car accident #2 in less than 9 months! Got sideswiped last night by a guy running a red light. Red means STOP, people!
“The tragedy of life doesn't lie in not reaching your goal. The tragedy lies in having no goal to reach.” -Benjamin Mays
I get so bored in the tanning bed
I don't like Austin of woe is me
STILL IN P.A i do love it when i come home...
When im counting this money i swear i start buggin out
(Insert shattering glass!) RT : #Top100Lies ...draw something is more fun minus the flirting... agrees ;)
We’re bored to death in heaven, and all alone in hell,
RT thank you! : Trying to help getting followers! :D
Fabulous idea to do poetry talk in March as prep for April's Poetry Month.
Damn, today makes 4 months for me and mishaa. I almost forgot. I must love her <3
yeahh it should. I think John was telling me bout it. Lol
Haha, it is. I guess he figured that enough Jews had already written Christmas songs.
“: Gluttony is a sin. I know ya ass been to Golden Corral.” lmaooo!!
shut the fuck up ypi slut
Sorry, try 1-888 instead of 1-877. That should be the correct number.
Lol why am I still awake
will believe the creation of jobs wen I C it ben lukin 4 a job 4 almost a year now
Mrs. Potato Head
made 100$ today for pep squad ;D
Have you guys seen those tiny AT&T sim cards? I bet those are perfect for mice with cocaine habits ...
Nah, but my nigga rap. He finna blow up
RT WI marathon & half-marathon runners: Visit the Team Challenge tent at finish to buy some celebratory post-race cupcakes!
I think a Chi-town reunion in Chi-town would be better.
We had fun doing the Google+ Hangout today. We will link to the video whe is it on YouTube. ^TR
well this guarantees you some gold bricks to heaven.
I like him,but I like him,but I like him,but I like him,& I like him.But I like number one the most.Confused yet?I am.
The DIA is already free for Detroiters on Friday. I don't see any "riff-raff", even though it is open late.
oh no! D: foes the popping hurt?
did they put crushed peanuts on ur strawberry cheesecake lol wtf? also as an aside i didn't enjoy fat greek, pita bread was awful.
#FreshmanYearTaughtMe that high school can be really fun, but now it's boring & depressing.
no way! How crazy! Thanks so much! Need to make my way out there to see you ;) Smooches!
The company I work for has gone to the other extreme: I don't have the option of getting a paper stub. Luckily I'm ok w/that.
at home?! Lol I dunno!
i can't wait until winter . (:
And yes, I know its not the real
"Beautiful earrings...was worried that 10K weight would be too heavy but not so" - Susan from Toronto, Canada
Louisiana companies doing great #invoiceasap congrats. made it happen thanks
You are so sweet. Thank you!
haha right?! It would be just perfect
Enough prime rib to kill a dogg.
Wow McD and UMD grad Heward-Bey goes in round one. What a nice surprise for him!
Happy Earth Day San Diego! Why not carpool to tonight's game? Be a little green and save some green on parking!
yes, I wore my puffy shirt today. By the way, did you watch Golf Channel as sleep aid?
RT : #DidYouKnow – Coleman Skeeter ‘12 is launching , bringing #greenhouse #farms to #urban areas like
Thanks for the follow #voices #voice over
I love him.
Dance Dance Dance! (:
Thanks for the support putting in the work.. :)
gettin ready for work blarring my country music 🎤🎵🎶
Because Penny is not a geek?
welcome to my life every night
On Monday we will celebrate Halloween with a $15.00 gift card give away! Like our page and you are automatically in the drawing!!!
so bangin!!!! Next some killer bassline assemblage!
- I have the same problem that's why I put my entrire voice mail access into my cell phone
regarding ped traffic accident map from blog: except for downtown, accidents tend to cluser in neighborhoods w/ lower median incomes.
Why is the carpet wet Todd?
true. With another 1st pick you can sure up other positrons but I have always been a fan of trading down
I'm done!
drink a bunch of water and you won't...
The Korean Zombie is the man! He chokes out Poirier in the 4th to win the main event of #UFC on
Thanks so much! We appreciate it more than words can say...
Almost 1 week away- "High Performance Branding for the Modern Age" event on 11/10 @ UM Cosford Theater w/ #VSApartners. #Students are FREE.
Spankings will likely be in order.
Would've been nice if this had shown up in my feed earlier. Jeez, Twitter. Anywho, I made choc chip and cheesecake cookie doughs.
nothing like a vanilla latte from Starbucks, on a really stormy&cloudy day. It just hits the spot(:
": Someone come over" okk.
oops… i meant GROG SHOP, not agora… sorry for confusion
good... Desperation is a necessity!
That's my goal! I know every service guy at #BMW on a first name basis. And their kids!
In the hood of his daddys car we pass around the old guitar and mamas wondering where we are its just me and my baby ' (:
bless u and thanks! :)
Teams of Richmond MBA students huddling in breakout rooms now; got a dose of strategy from Prof Bosse & marketing insights from Prof Raggio
come back to Indiana and bring him to me!
does Joey Barton stay at QPR after his antics?
I actually wrote a blog post about how I would have cast the roles :)
It's a beautiful day in #Chicago! How do you plan on enjoying the warmer today? :)
OMG these children followed me watching my azz then when I caught them the ran off screaming bye Mz. Fine Lady lol nasty azz children SMH
Go !! I love sharing my birthday with !! :)
I was at the concert when Justin had a laughing attack. ~flips hair.
Need to find out what the clipping path layer was named. I'm dealing with over 16,000 files. All with paths named differently.
a little AC? The Roses look hit today. Have a great broadcast. ON WIS!
"Congrats to Benjamin Hendricks Brownsburg, IN wins the Finish Line 500 Festival 5K!”
Off to #Bogota!
Haha RT : Eddie Money would not have been as successful had he have stuck with his original name, Eddie Food Stamps.
it was nice taking with ya tonight! Lol
Saw "Midnight in Paris" but was thrown after the credits when Samuel L. Jackson tries to recruit Woody Allen for the Avengers.
I can't wait till 's Ustream!(:
The legacy of the #ANC is the legacy of the people of South Africa and supporters across the globe!
I just went to the concert. I don't even have any words to express my elation right now.
Watching 's keeks all day while home sick<3
It's alot of coonery on the Expressway today! Dudes getting out of their cars hollering at females walking like they won't get ran over!
At the radio station Putin in work..
South Africa: Next week, academic workshops with 7th/8th grade primary school students!
I love the feeling, as my skin drinks in sweet raindrops, with the dawn.
Don't forget - I will be at the Wilsonville Public Library Holiday Book Sale tomorrow from 10am-noon, please come by and say hello.
hi Michelle :) play me “: Hi my name is Michelle and I'm addicted to Scramble with friends.”
A cigar and a glass of wine may cure stress at least after a full week of court
Watching this Left Eye story and thinking money doesn't make everyone happy..crazy how her life ended!!!
RT : #NameYourFavoriteRapper: Jar Jar-Z, MC Vader, Notorious B.A.N.T.H.A, Obi-Wan Trice, and Artoopac
AWESOME! You'll have to wear your heels again that nite! ;)
I'm Chief tho ... Lol, how could you get confused.
Also google virtualbox. Lets you run a different operating system within your current one (e.g., Snow Leopard within Windows)
All done with my #FFs for the day! DM me if I somehow forgot you and I will make it up to you...
's cameltoe is definitely one of the city's best!
Ohh totally!!! We totally were better than rebecca's squad(; or was she on ours?! I forgot!
FB: why does your uploader suck so hard?
for a moment I thought "Kevin Costner" came up as a "person I might know" on LI - but it wasn't him...
i been grown girl :)
So I could not remember my twitter user name a minute ago
ITS FINALLY HERE!!! #SWEETDREAMS!!!! WE GOING IN TODAY!!! #MARKETFRIDAY #INFERNO #AKAs + #FF ;LETS GO
Keep Ya Head Up
Yanks can afford to take a chance on Johan&Give up nice pieces who won't get off the pine in 2012. Mets get cheap depth at SS,C,LHP,RHP,OF
Maki doing Ave Maria was simply breathtaking!
I don't care.
interesting.. excited to spend more time with it! Glad to hear you're enjoying it. Do you rent or own it?
I heard that when liberals meet in the dark the teach each other Chinese and talk to Iranians on Skype about how they love Obama.
We practice for Patty's Day 364 days a year. Where will you be this Saturday?
Did I miss something? Is this #customerservicefree day? Where no #customerservice will be given today?
I'm really glad my dates never end with Chris Hansen in my living room
#karmaloop just got a new look! use promo code NEWLOOK with repcode MARYJANEEATER to save 21% + Free Shipping on orders over $75!
Absolutely! Addictions come in many sizes, shapes & colors. Change is inevitable, but growth is a choice.
We want to hear your stories! Share with us your latest business success story.
Glow in the dark frisbe or make-up...? Yeah. Glow in the dark frisbe
iPhone bitches!
James is wearing see through shorts...
God I need to go to Mexico and talk to my parents ASAP
when i'm here for you it's okay to tell me.
almost a year and a half...hes gettin big
haha I wouldn't doubt that but you know Miami is going to conference semi finals
Just be glad I gave him caffeine-free Coke!
Last song of the concert and last song of the tour. Guess what it was?
RT Still have an info website? Yur customers went mobile years ago - in fact over 200 million of them. Text me: 916-420-6020 to learn more
Yes sir the Bulls got the dub tonight
yeah, since those are 2 different companies that basically hate each other, i find that rather unlikely.
I know it's kind of undemocratic (lol) to not let democrats meet each other, but in the name of national security I think we must do it.
”#Bloggers and honest #SM should be valued +respected by brands. We 'speak' what the rest of the world 'thinks'.”
Thanks. Wish there wasn't a silly ocean between us. Going to try and snooze again. You should try too. 💜 U!
If someone's odor is bothering you, please call our Circulation/Security Desk at 274-0472 and report the problem. We'll handle it.
RT : New details in the death of an #ABQ teen-- why BCSO says this was not a suicide & hear from her classmates at 10
Sometimes I think way too much.
No way. Shameless play for the senior citizen vote.
Afternoon Tea Booked!
Hallelujah, hallelujah, hallelujah
u niggas really need to bless that 'welcome to h-town' beat man
Duane Wilson with 25 and Austin Malone-Mitchell with 14 to lead Playground Elite past Nike Team Florida at Nike League.
It depends on the use. Normally, I don't have problems but for active tasks, I got sport earbuds.
what's up tresha. Yes I am. My schedule is making it hard to but I'll be around. I'll be at Smashburger tmrw.
pack your bags! :)
yes! I have for a couple years now & became an advisor a few months ago.
haha will do my friend
Extremely worried about chad... I fucked up today dude. I fucked up.
Ooh, very interesting especially in the wake of Amy Winehouse's death
Yeah man,,,I'm in.
Well Good night sweet dreams ^.^
My mom gunna make me freaking late to school cus she decided to make herself breakfast....
Visit from the clutter fairy! RT : I want a clothesline for Mother's Day.
getting ready for the holidays. we'll have several hundred new releases being put up within the next week! :>)
Congrats to #76ers! What a game! What a game !
Thanks for the RT, we love the bags!
“: Mitch Barnhart and Matthew Mitchell holding a presser tomorrow. Guessing he's getting a new contract...!” or he's banging joker
you bet! Can't wait to start getting #Video on the site!
It's like Christmas, watching open up his new camera and everything that goes with it. He's even still in his jammies.
#Gifboom is my new obsession....follow me..Deven0809
Watching "The Wire" season 3, A+SERIES! Black masculinity being defined in extremities of the hyperviolent and über-menacing vs EDUCATED=ILL
Praying for Japan!
"America I've given you all and now I am nothing. America peace officer forced to release pepper spray to maintain public safety"
+1 RT : Lame. His loss. Sorry
Who wanna go to la fitness wit me ?
wish for a big black penis? Or the perfect life.... Wait you already have it because it's a life filled with happiness(:
#freeben is in Twitter Jail! lol or :( and also : /
STILL FULL!
Those days when everyone seems to be on a different page than you.
#webwise role of school libraries in science teaching: digital textbooks in CA w/open content; historically hindered by budgets & filters
: Well as long as it isn't a bad thing, haha.
The text my best friend just sent me <><><><>
I love chu so hacking much.
. "what is the shape of Italy? A BOOT!"
Follow Back Becca? :)
yes, we haven't.
Inspired by Iconic Buddhist Auspicious Symbols, Suma Chander&#39;s Fall/Winter 2012 Collection Focuses on the Geometric ...
Nightmare on elm street is some scary stuff! 1 2 freddy's coming for you 3 4 better lock your door! Don't fall asleep! :((
The gym is always great and all, but damn I just wanna play some hockey
'Rent in regards to percent of sales should be under 10%' Frank White of New Markets
RT : The meaning of life is whatever you ascribe it to be. Being alive is the meaning~Joseph Campbell
It's National Library Week, where are my librarian themed presents!?!
Waiting for Pretty in Pink to start at Crown Center.
SundanceAutos thanks for following The Hilltop on Twitter!
That's true. So why not do a gag order?
Yea looks like a super nice lineup this year. MM headlining though? <
Wonder who all mad @ me
I know it won't end this way, but I'd like to point out that ATM, your RBs (both playing now) are worth -1 pts.
I'm just days away from having my first baby, then I can finally crack open my Skinnygirl margarita bottle!
Have you tried our Balsamic Glaze Chicken yet? Come find what all of our customers are raving about!
Pickup Line: When God made you, he was showing off
I am so sad for tonight.
Dang it,i forgot my youtube password and i just created it yesterday!!!:D
Grad school is giving me gray hairs. So I'll be a gray-haired lady just in time for becoming a librarian.
I'd see if you could get Harding
REMEMBER: Headache puppy does not approve the repettive refreshing
#Basketballwives Royce father is right... Stop having all those different dudes around your son and grow up...
Ima thug, I'm a real thug I shot tupac
you guys were amazing(: forever
Why am I awake????
2-man league on Monday night! Time to sign up for some fun. All new format and great prizes. call for info 608-244-4325
Wish I could go! Alas.
#20ThingsAboutMe i have alot of friends but there are only a few i can trust.
yeah. crowd's nothing to write home about though.
Keep retweeting and tell your friends too! Also, tonight at the Euclid Tavern, late night karaoke with Steve and announcer
In class watching august rush
Watching Groundhog Day on Netflix, like everyone else.
#boredwisconsin RT : The most viewers the Recall Cam has had was about 1400. That came this morning at about 9AM.
#ImThatPersonWho will be successful someday
Just tuned into the game the boys got this, alrite alrite alrite...
and what's that favor!?
That is in fact true!
Evidently Aaron Sorkin (screenwriter for The Social Network and The West Wing) has agreed to write the new Steve Jobs movie
You've got to earn your love up in this part of town.
meh. not that interested in it...it just says ongina followed by to the right of my timeline. thought id ask. :d
cost of a billboard
A fast paced lifestyle can take its toll on the health and appearance of Americans.
The dial tone of a normal telephone is in the key of "F"
i just beat summer pignic with 3 stars on all levels!:D
correction, I watched it and and we're "just in the living room" the whole time.
3 finals down, 2 to go.
So happy to se big daddy berk finally get a ring. Long time stud of my fantasy baseball team.
Preferences are negotiable. Convictions are non-negotiable. -Tony Hill, 2-time Super Bowl champion with Cowboys.
yes (so far)
ik! :( I was too busy being "fake" I didn't realize I was loosing the corn
On the back to NY
Working on homework with my sons can be do rewarding :)
you jump,i jump...remember
July 4, 1776: the day that we �unfollowed� King George
Me too!
I love that has an automatic echo. Everything he RTs or favorites, so does some other guy. He has his own personal follower.
Im about 3sec away from fucking somebody up i promise to god somebody gon lose they life.!
its reciprocal bro.
Don't miss #entrepreneur ": Thomas M. Borger speaking at InnoTech Dallas 5/17. Join us! #innotechdfw"
#Didyouknow Yunnan Pu-er Teas were found to have the ability to destroy cancer cells? - Yunnan Natural Medicine Research Institute
I mean really, how inept can we be? Some $6.6bn flown into Iraq 8 ago may have been stolen, according to a US official investigating fraud.
Happy #Tuesday everyone! Shine on!
that's awesome BJ!
Wait... I thought this was the replay...
subbotnik In Soviet Union, practice or act of working voluntarily on a Saturday, for the benefit of the collective
My mango addiction is getting out of hand.
Yay! RT : Great class at with ! I really needed that.
Ugh! I just want to watch the rest of My Life As Liz, stupid slow computer!
I may just have to stop in sometime this weekend. Thanks for the welcoming.
Digging jazz and reading through 's blog today. If only my music history teacher had based her class on The Rest is Noise.
Advice is what we ask for when we already know the answer but wish we didn't.
I miss you too babyluv </3 I hope it works out too!
That pic is awesome!
hahah oh jeez thought i wwas special
can i be ur bobby darin?
good stuff.
Thanks for checking the folio!
Chilling in the house of reps right now.
Me too! I ALWAYS try to mess with them.
Fitness is the key to winning tennis. It will help your footwork and your mental game.
I think the women in his life were much more interesting. From Katherine of Aragon to Catherine Parr, they all were fierce.
I WILL be finishing this bag of Wheat Thins.
ohkayy :) that's fine thank you
Guy Pearce has joined the cast of Iron Man 3. Scarlett Johansson will be back in this one also. The movie is being film close to me
We have a few favorite apps, but AAC is not an area we specialize in...we have colleagues who do!
yep... i collect random candy wrappers ... !
KG. love watchin him play
Was hopping twisted my ankle now I need first aid lol but foreal who wanna take care of me n my time of pain lol
Liking this new rotation
notice me out of 20million #BELIEVE 32
Why are honest vendors so hard to find these days?
thanks for the mention! Cheers!
It's National Hot Tea Month, come by to see our delicious selection - enjoy!
I love how they have a typo in the first sentence. It's a university, innit?
From moisturizing Shea Butters to Black Soaps made by West African Women Cooperatives
wheres that vid u said u were gonna post? :)
Jr Smith just need to stand still and shoot
ninety ninety seven. The year of the finest.
"Home is not where you live, but where they understand you."
Hanging@ Temecula Beer and Wine Garden.. great band!
20 more minutes. I hate school. #summervacation or #spring break?
I think I may still be drunk from last night. Interesting. Now the question, drink myself down? or nap and suffer through?
Know thyself, be yourself, live life but not being somebody else.....
Good morning people.
A little studio time and a little concert this weekend. Should be rad.
Enjoy 50% Off at restaurants with the California Express VIP Card, call now to join 619.226.1121
Cyborg chauffeur pulled over for turning left on red, trying to drag me into the driver's seat. Let me finish this tweet, Gamgam!
Today turned out pretty ok :) had fun at the mall with my besties!! Missed you guys! Needs to happen again :)
I'm so excited for you and your trip!
5 Coolest Things. SR71 Takeoff. Forward swept wing aircraft. DC8 aircraft for flying science @ 500ft. 600 rocket launches.
Come get one mouth watering burger
What's goodie my G
Who's comin to MyStudio tonight for OMARIONS Official Mixed tape Red Carpet event with special CONFIRMED Invited guest CHRIS BROWN!!!
Can't wait till I can drive:x
Johnny Bananas & Camilla hasn't tweeted nothing yet? Wonder if it's a sign? WONDER
Morning run in Vegas = awesome. I might not like the people here but the building facades are grand to run through.
and I just witnessed perfection.
A taste for truth at any cost is a passion which spares nothing. - Albert Camus
Saw JEFF, WHO LIVES AT HOME tonight.enjoyed it! Duplass Brothers are pretty awesome!
Count us among the sane! RT : Thanks 4 the mention....
I mean !!! U need 1000 because I can't follow you !!!
God bless Texas!
Nor for the rest of us. Glad you decided to take to the razor. ;-)
just noticed a spot opened for the photography course I wanted to take -- score!
I eat my dessert before my dinner.
congrats to twitter peeps on their MLA awards!
Hearing daughter with him in his post game interview made me smile and even laugh too, even after that crappy game
nope I hope ur happy
My life plan: MAKE MONEY! LOTS OF MONEY!!! Backup Plan: Spearmint Rhino Stripper
Hello twitterverse! Here again. Do you like it? ;-) I've been busy...just like everyday. I hope you don't forget me...
That's my dude!! Good Luck. Keep up the good work
Modern mommy dilemma of the day....how many bags of groceries fit in a Mini Cooper? A lot with some creativity!
Developers who think they can live in a dark cave and only come out for food are fooling themselves.
Happy Monday! For all of our gardeners, here are some growing tips for broccoli. We hope your gardens are looking good!...
no words is an Understatement smh
I always see you around school but we haven't been able to talk much. #MissingYou :/
i don't have time to slow down and deal with your personal issues. too much goin on, sorry.
About to start breakout session three: "In the Web: How Moving Towards a Linked Data Model Can Revolutionize Libraries"
Tomorrow going back in the studio, let's get the creativity back out:-)
leadership is about igniting passion in others - are you trying to align people with your values instead of getting on board with theirs?
so is this King Sexicano twitter account is real?
nice to see you here! Look forward to more of your amazing photos!
snow... where did you come from???
i know right i luv my city
Go Seahawks. Need Eagle and Giants loss to keep my Boys looking good in 1st.
no he was just threatening me
Tomorrow we will be putting pinball machines into the Shanghai Tunnel.
#StevenTyler singing live on American Idol!!!!!!!!! <3 Love him muah!
‘Education is not the filling of a pail, but the lighting of a fire.’ William Butler Yeats
thats all you can do
all i want to do is watch tv in the bath tub. is that too much to ask?
Just a public note that Quarter Life has always been two words. Capitalized. Thanks.
Me! Going great. Eatin' eggs bacon w/ espresso now RT : Who else is on day 16 of #Whole30 How's it going?! ...
New Album and film coming soon from Levi Chen! Look for good news on the Chinese New Year (January 23)!!!
JVR and SIMMONDS are Horrible. The Flyers havent been the same since JVR came back.
windin' down from the long weekend... work tomorrow.
In MKY, hanging with Patrick O'Rourke in the LA, good times!
Why would someone describe themselves as a cereal entrepreneur? Are Toasty-Ohs that profitable? What? Oh, "serial". Okay.
I miss you buddy
Thanks! Hope we can construct one of these this spring in Charlottetown
i dontt have any :(
ran out of soy milk today, so i had to use cream YUK! tasted like vomit!!
Sunshine Pils draft is now available
Ex-Green drama teacher indicted on sex charges
vodka and NFL gameday final here at the Johnson household. Merry Christmas and another Happy bear beatdown!
Happy Birthday i love you and your such an inspiration:)
aweh(: yeah I'm goin through a tough time. My parents are fighting BAD. and I might have to move an 8th time. it's so scary
Goodnite my fb peeps. 9am call time in da CBD. For me and my faithful Honda Civic companion.
I always think the next nigga tryna get over. That's just my state of mind.
and if they do, them shits will be at outlet stores fast
Tweet me fashion blogs to stalk. I'm bored.
listening to Chopin. It's great for #MyHealth and yours. #music is #food for the
Prepping for #IronFork see you tonight!
#Prop8 unconstitutional! 9th Circuit upholds the decision! Thank you
my day is all off today, woke up on the wrong side of the bed.
"Most of us spend too much time on the last twenty-four hours and too little on the last six thousand years." - Will Durant
No Don't Go Way,Boy You Got My Heartbeat Runnin'Way!
Let's go Dawgs!!
is to Apps, what DeLorean was to cars. Cool, fun and stylish then run into the ground... Well minus the cocaine charges
A government that robs Peter to pay Paul can always depend on the support of Paul. ~ George Bernard Shaw
I used to be this guy sitting with an open heart, now my computer screen’s the only place I feel a spark.
when working on your abs, don't ignore the transverse muscle! it helps to give them a more drawn-in appearance
#Twilight appearance, yuck.
seeks Balto/DC/SATRAD PT opportunities. Email: ; Online Website: www.mpvt123.com; Facebook or Twitter
We don't have any events for our Friday list of upcoming international student webinars and virtual fairs! Anyone know of any for next week?
Please play "I'm Not A Gangsta" by ! I lvoe that song!
Dont forget Pastor ...... JESUS is the REURRECTION AND THE LIFE!!!!!
Don't have basement Trying to decide on going to TDF
is the reason I am wearing Green today.
I'm just gonna go ahead and put it out there...I'm suuuupppaaahhhh jealous of those couples out there. :(
Thank you everyone who came out to Hotel Cafe tonight, very fun!
OMG i won the contest for to go to the movie premiere of bully omq
not for a month. Need to train for it
Jinx! You owe each other a Coke.
#NeverShouldYouEver keep textin or calling me after the last 3 times you tried its not gon work.
Oh hell... open yo eyes!
Cuz you've been hurt before, I can see it in your eyes.
is headed to ! Congrats man.
hahahahaha she's kind of slow!! But that's why we love her!
Mia and dallas are huge markets, coincidence they were in the finals?
HURRY UP AND SHOW THE VIDEO FOR BOYFRIEND <3 <3
It's snowing.... very random because it barely snowed all winter!!
So if enough of us say we hate Greg Miller, will you fire him?
Thanks to everyone that came to the reception last night, we had a great time. Happy resurrection day! God bless
Thank for RT'ing the robin's nest and warbler photos Scott. I had a wonderful time at The Biggest Week. Sort of sad to be back.
Jesus: "So now I gotta root for the Jets?!"
Thank you. I'll gladly give it a shot. :)
Peace up, A-Town down.
"Breathe Again" by has my heart tonight.
yes I would [: I'm married to Lil Wayne, sorry you missed the wedding bud. (;
Thx for following please help me get followers :D
awe thanks! Haha (not even close!!) (:
Merry Merry Christmas DALE
ready to shop and get my girls pretty as A Daisy for Easter bunny day
Look out for the KOOP Radio table at Barton Creek Sq. Mall Farmers Mkt today till 1pm. Plz stop by and say hello!
Oh! #AvengingSpiderMan looks f'n INSANE good. That teaser OBC on the Marvel books is a great teaser for the book. Well done.
The way it should be lol
we should try to meet up tonight !
Anyone doing the #PolarPlunge this Sunday in #Muskego? If so, text PLUNGE to 35350 for updates/last minute info! We'll be there with prizes!
Get money , my nigga . Do good with ya people !!
S/O to for playing Fall Out Boy "Sugar we're going down"
To all the comentarors suck it bitches .
GOOD LUCK! I voted for you!
nothing in life is going to feel right until i get this one thing it gives me life something to look forward to
i wonder if isabel can see me stalkin her & if she is readin this tweet lol (:
Jesus Buddha Allah please let this happen RT : Charles Barkley must call Knicks-Bobcats
yes maria?
dubai hotel jobs
NUBLU WEDNESDAY...... *BRASIL PARTY W CARLOS DARCI from BANDA BLACK RIO... *ZE LUIS QUARTET plays the early set.. *GREG CAZ spinns...
Cater2.me's Wednesday word: Gravlax (Pronounced GRAHV-lahks) - Raw salmon cured in a salt-sugar-dill mixture.
Idk who is but her avi has the finest man on the planet
There are only four words that is so much better than "I love you."
And any kind of mom. :-D RT : Happy Mother's Day to all moms plus all doggie/kittie moms! :)
Pinterest may not be curating, but its great to build visual collections : ) Graphic designers dream social media.
Yes! Same from us too! RT : Happy Birthday to the Pope of Trash and my own spiritual guide of sin, John Waters!
It's the day after Christmas and we're all so tired. So today we watch movies until we're rewired.
perhaps you need a recombobulation center. Okay, letting that one die, tempting tho it will ever be.
Man! what a great time in Cincinnati. Thanks to everyone that made it such an awesome night. We'll be back soon!
no one ever likes my pictures on facebook. if a slutty girl posts the most hideous picture of herself on there, she'll get 100000. gaah
Sometime it's like didn't u read that cuz you acting like a bitch!
Audition number two today! For a commercial again.
Stupidest girl in the history of humanity.
Reputation points have worked well to get better citizen contributed data.
I was wondering where he went. Wasn't me, though he appears to be enjoying himself!
Bahhaha it say GET TESTED bahaha.
Acouple of years ago we saw a sign like that for someone's pet snake.
loved your show at the Pabst tonight!
Did you know I co-founded Bank of America? Neither did I. BOA Worldwide was an online media advertising biz with far less debt.
Awh, you little baby bird. Wasn't it delicious? Just wait, it's nothing but hunger dreams and ranch dressing from here.
Follow back please?? :D
Congratulations to the New York Giants for the Superbowl.
In a matter of a couple of seconds you can scan your doc, import into TimeMatters, and save to your hardrive.
Hope you have an awesome day... :):)
Happy Mother's Day to my Fairy Godmother Mother Pucker! She's a real lemon sucker that one! :0)
The Lions Rampart is gearing up to tear the Madison apart!
I'm legally changing my name and I need sum suggestions for names. $100 contest for the best name. Call 1-877-692-0008 ext 31 say Name Game
I'll be working the ALA booth at TLA this morning!
Ironically I've been scared to bring my iPod. boarding I think my poor little brain might overload.
Sing something from Camp Rock PLEASE !! #NickJChat 0
I'm on a private tour of the #HDmuseum with and many others.
Congratulations to Julia for winning the VIP entry at Performance Outfitters last weekend!
Oh I've been bewitched by RA for a while, it just intensified lately since Spooks ;-D
Blake Griffin raped him :/
Ok y'all, I'll stop with the baseball tweets now. Off to sleep...perchance to dream about Matt Kemp. Good night!
Bounce on Saturday = Crazy! & what do you think?
lmaoo my unnecessary hand motions
Good lord, an entire family walked in wearing Ed Hardy. Not sure how to respond.
king of heave and hell lol
It's gonna be in the BankAtlantic Center Oh and it's on July 1 2012 lol idk y I believed those girls in class -.-
Thanks for sending it, tho! Can't imagine he'll be invited back. Is it ever a good idea to start a lecture w/ a Klan joke?!
are the most amazing musicians weknow and together they createthe most beautiful music
Even after a bad harvest there must be sowing. ~ Seneca
So glad I don't do lent, I love the food I eat, swearing, and every urge I have that others push themselves to suppress
celtics getting heated. WOO! GO CELTICS!
Good morning Twitter.
One day the right guy will come.
Though LOVE him as an actor, he DEFINITELY is George NOclueNEY.
Looking for a double header Twitter Chat tonight? #journchat at 8 pm ET and the meet me on #Socialchat at 9 pm ET talking
Note on FB re 10 MPH: "It's movies like your that make me mega-heart Loved every minute of the story of your journey. Inspiring!"
Say she only smash like 4 or 5 homies so you know you gotta multiply by three.
I love his music!
Yeah, not sure. Lots of distractions tonight. 22 days right? RT : 5:26????? where in the hell did that come from?
I love ur son MB did amazing on mindless behavior countdown keep up the good work<3MB<3
Dat was gay
There's no conspiracy behind the way two hearts meet when love is a two way street..
In the test kitchen today: one of my Nana's recipes from childhood, but using an ingredient grown in Guatemala. Coffee Gelatin!
On my way!
Rihanna Gives Sexiest ‘Saturday Night Live’ Performance Ever
About to watch my recording of :) #EXCITED! Had class so couldn't watch it live. :/
she hasn't been G'd out a day in her life.
well okay then...
Kickoff of the 2011 college football season this weekend. Boise St. and Georgia is what I'm watching tomorrow. Georgia upset baby!
You've got a way to keep me on your side. You give me cause for love that I can't hide. For you I know I'd even try to turn the tide.
Gonna try being "guest hosts" at our club tomorrow night. That will be fun!
Watching Tina Marie....wow hard to believe she's gone.
#Russell got in a fight?!
is the sweetest :)
Other people and things can stop you temporarily. You're the only one who can do it permanently.~Zig Ziglar
#breakingbad fans should tune into for background on the meth epidemic. Some neat computer-assisted reporting highlighted too
I'm not a fan of bieber but I must admit I am well jel of him
Erwin, deferential, conciliatory, and courteous
RT : I have a further 20% off deals w/code ljmom. Go shop now for facial, lashes, car wash, etc-...
England keeps enticing me with web standards guys and gals. I want to cross the pond to see it for myself.
That's cute!
oh man! I totally would have taken you up on that offer! Raincheck?
Taylor Gang or fall down 10 flights of stairs with roller blades on.
Presenting #legalmarketing industry survey results to NYC CMOs today! Looking forward to a good discussion.
": Take a breath when you need to... and JUST BE NICE! :-) #RonR"
Go to the Musée des beaux-arts, it's very relaxing! Or to M:brgr if you want a burger.
Shout out to my peeps at hit them up for studio time and don't forget to follow!!!
Oh, hi there "overwhelming sense of responsability", I was wondering when you were going to show up.
Love songs radio on #Pandora reminds me of high school dances
Do you ever notice that when you're driving, anyone going slower than you is an idiot and everyone driving faster than you is a maniac?
I am cool now!
You have to! lol. I have like 50 more pages to go. I'm kinda more skimming than reading it thoroughly though..
- Yeah dude its gonna be a CRAZY Weekend!! dont forget sunday ENDLESS SUMMER rooftop @ The Clarendon! we are parting all week!!
. -- "I think that thrs an old spirit of the remnants of the south that comes 2 life evry 1ce in a while...
What makes a quality experience? RT : OTOH, Im torn bet too much use of smartphones in galleries vs people really LOOKIN
OKC and Lakers for semi finals ^.^
Goodnight Dallas!!
Guys always wonder what girls are thinking... then we realize they are wondering the same thing hehe;) this could be fun:)
I think we're on the same page here.
live from on in advance of tomorrow's debate in "Old Main." Nice to see my college campus on TV.
what's up?
put her in the chamber all against her wilt chamberlain.
Power and luxury
Anyone know how to check for a coordinate "near" MKPolyLine along its length :)
Someone close to me said that life changed them into being who they are now. As much as I don't like that, my view of life and people sucks.
Want to throw an awesome photo project with me? DM me!!!!
Tomorrow is the next day of the rest of your life.
not true. The practice is solo but how does the world ousude of u know u learned. Maybe your work sucks but u think its great
yummy shiner bock! Prost!
people need to stop blaming Lebron for everything smh
WTR Tv Ch 197 time warner 5pm right now
I'm sure he'll talk about it on HIS show...oh wait, never mind. I forgot he doesn't have one.
Feelings change.
does it tell you what system you are a resident from?
Boy by not with them shoes on
I was when LA tied the series. I wanted Buffalo to win! We could have played them for round 2! Damn Philly >.>
“ look like basquiat.”
Daaammnn.. i knew yall had this one for sure...
Spezzature- having a certain nonchalance, so as to conceal all art and make whatever one does or say appear to be w/o effort
Congrats for ATT....RT : Huge day: On Friday, AT&T set a new single-day record for its iPad sales and activations.
Bless ya! RT : I'll have to tell myself to not retweet every tweet
Pins and needles in my butt
lol it's pretty cowboy centric but it's still fun once a year I guess. You a trip lol u & your Ebonics
Payphone has been stuck in my head for days! It is a pretty good song though.
Yes I really do!
Summer is coming! Patio will be open, music playing - summer cocktail Bleu Velvet: Skyy, lime, blue curacao. DM for deets!
how long does this sxsw app take to process the events? it's been 10 minutes so far. maybe i'll take a bath and it will be done?
Yes! at amazing drinks and #food!
Thank you for #ShineYourDivine with us! Lots of #Gratitude #Blessings going around as we get ready to unveil the speakers
👎😡 RT : both of our Saturdays have been shitty. 😒
I have a feeling I'll wake up sick tomorrow -.-
Ok BEDTIME. SWEET DREAMS :-) TOMOROW SCHOOL :'(
um I don't know.. the pink one is really cute but personally I'd probably pick the black one.
She fat eatin all da food
CFSA has seen a decline in its caseload, but the staffing levels have remained the same. My question is why?
thrilled. I don't know why I haven't done this already.
Turiaf has been productive Spo, you gotta put him back on the court
- Hate Me If You Want , To Be Honest iDont Caree , Love Me If You Wantt , iDont Care . Either Wayy Im On Your Mindd , # Dakota&&Brittney.!
Great movie. I gotta see it again.
Picnic date shall be fun c:
you don't really want my heart, you just like to know you can.
Waiting for the shuttle at the hotel for disney :D with my lil' sis. <3
Went to a Pre-screening of The 5 Year Engagement and signed a confidentiality agreement to not speak about the movie until it's release :(
I think i finally found a song that describes everything i'm feeling right now
IN BLACK TWO PARTIES FOR THE PRICE OF ONE 9AM TO 6AM***** Special Guest FMI Mafia Dolls
getting my hair wbu
Process tells us how. Purpose tells us why. Process is the purpose. Another #Alinsky crumb for thoughtful(or less) implementation
Zero if you're using Nest! Check it out, super cool new technology to save energy and make lives easier
DC Saw Charles Jones on TV w Fenty. I thought felons could not comingle?
Sad epiosde of the walking dead. #shocked :(
My roommate is dancing around amd singing to usher. Dear God help me.
yeah, and quality takes a hit. big time.
oh my gosh. i just realized you followed me yesterdday ♥.♥
hey girl jbjbjbjbjbj thts wht all i think about : >
New shows in the works, more info soon
RT : Its okay to accept a million mistakes, but never accept the same mistake over and over again
Books are already available; currently in production with video programs that integrate the metronome sentences and oral drills
Since I'm a man of the people, I want to hear your sasquatch slappin' ideas! What's the first thing you want me to do as Mayor of Chicago?
Today is Steeler Pride! Steel City Pregame Show at the Gateway Clipper. Check out the Go Fast Pass by the Football Toss!
see you there! “: We'll be outchea tonight! Be there! TONIGHT: OPEN BAR $10 Entry and at 8:00 at Busby's East.”
I'm in the mood to 3 a box jump.
Hitting the gym then enjoying this amazing weather
It's warming up in FL thank goodness. Me & the cold don't go together
My #zumba classes at have TOTALLY prepped me for a stint on
they really arent :)
did you play any sports in high school?
hey baby girl
NEXT YEAR, will have a #CorporateChallenge team. We promise. Good luck to y'all!
OMG kittens!! My cat rescue has kittens!! Little fuzzy orange tabby kittens!! So hard to leave them there.
not a chance.
Remember to read something positive in morning and something positive at night. daryldorsey.com
I'm done spending my money to keep learning HOW TO DO IT. From now on I'm spending my money DOING IT!!!
"MT" means I modified your tweet. (so it would fit with my comment in the 140 char limit)
ASDFGHHJKL I LOVE
happy Easter <3
Just watched #thewantedonidol & ...... you are such a flirt (;
THANKS! for the RT about :)
Something the average tourist wouldn't know!!
yes, I feel bad for Angel but they shouldn't get sympathy votes.
RT : Shrinking budgets mean teachers R having 2 put new things on student skool supply lists…including cleaning supplies....
Totes McGotes Chessey. Sorry for clogging up your Twitter feed...see you in 1.5 hours. ;)
Our glory is not ever Falling Down....Our Glory is getting back up every time...If you are willing to stay in the "game" you will succeed!
hm never had it...ill def check it out! thanks!
I think I'll be moving my home office outside this morning!
#IWillAlwaysLove CLASSIC ARTIST'S..
Absolutely -- especially by train! RT : #kidlitchat I travel when possible.
I'm going to go deaf dealing with him lol
Hi Barbara! So glad your friend is excited about ICTC! Please feel free to send my email:
oh I will, I'm watching concerts on tv because I got my wisdom teeth out yesterday hahah
Only have the vision, experience, and leadership qualities to transform the Hilltop into OUR Georgetown. Follow them today!
I havent RT : you guys met Nick?
I love them too, I love NYC, I really do, but for right now I have too much tying me to Portland.
Almost game time at US Airways Arena. I honestly would not be surprised either way
Have a great time Danielle!!! Thanks again for using ShowClix :)
Okay, #THATCamp LAC applicants: check your email!
Who do the Packers take tonight in the first round? Gain my praise if you're correct.
Password changed. Hopefully I can move on and be free of the ghost hacker.
I put in at least 20 hrs a week playing that sport. I am hooked on in :))
I'm renaming Michigan-Notre Dame the "Suck Bowl"
RT if you love all your fans an you notice them?!:D <3
Win or lose. Loyal and true.
Nice job. Knew you'd be big after '99 double whammy in Phoenix.
You're not in Canada anymore...
that's one of my old ones.:) Thank you beautiful!
you mean your retarded? Knew it...
Copying Family VHS tapes to DVD...seems to have been a mad rush from people before christmas to get them done!!
can you follow my other account please
...and now Aaliyah is playing on K104. Thank you, Baby Girl. <3
its not like theyre ESPN announcers here, these guys are on Fox Sports SAN ANTONIO! Sean Elliott even played with Tim Duncan!
Do you know someone I can help with my great services? Thank you for taking your time to check us out.
I'm headed up toward Annandale to check out these storms. Tell me want you see by using
Sometimes I feel down... But then I see a guy bumping Warren G in a Walmart parking lot at midnight and feel so much better about myself
#Celtics are currently putting on a clinic for "How to miss open shots"
Who Gnna Stop Me???
I a stupid hoee
I need an infant gronk nation shirt if possible?!
thanks for the RT and follow on Friday!
I dont watch kris humphries much but when i do he scores on the wrong goal.
Do you think the ancients knew the speed of light? 299792458 fractal. Multiply each digit times the next = 3265920 x 6 = 1959552 = Nineveh #
Oh my goodness, that sounds AMAZING!!! :) :) :)
the all caps would indicate that you're surprised. DO YOU KNOW ME, WOMAN??!
****All items aren't guaranteed to be in stock.
she can dunk, but the real question is, can she cook and clean?
see you at church tomorrow(: 🙏⛪
There is no way to happiness, happiness is the way. ~Gautama Buddha
Oh Egg Nog in my coffee, how I've missed you!
Drunk < High
fog in caledonia and we are just waiting for the storms to roll through. Too quite right now.
"aren't expected to do so," does that mean there is still a small chance the Rams will tag Lloyd or has it been confirmed they wont?
Josh! How are you? xx
#Wizards actually beat the #Thunder last night. Their win streak is now at 1. Avg tix: $24 via Fan Cost X iPhone app.
Yeah let's just move it to next weekend so I have all weekend and week to ask!! :)
omg thank you so so much for following me i love you 
how sad of you I'm really sorry
“ will be featuring this friday 03/11 @ Sharon Baptist Come celebrate God's love with 9pm-1pm”
You're very welcome.
Boy: Wanna have sex? Girl: My doctor said I can't have sex for 2 weeks. Boy: What did your dentist say?
Heat beat Grizzlies in six to win the championship.
same here but I hate her even more cause she cheated on the boy that I'm madly in love with
Favorite line in Clannad: Negi's dad: You act like we got an ass full of porn magazines back here. But we don't. XD
thanks for mentioning the blog post!!!
I just earned the Meathead badge on #Yelp!
We're working on it! :)
I'm having some friends come into town next weekend, and of course we want to go out and party.
It's not just the ladies.. is another celeb who will never starve himself to look good for a part again... Kudos to him!!
thanks(: I know.
1st thought: I knew there was a reason I dug The Brooke Baldwin. 2nd thought: Just once? We need to add to that total, asap.
stop it with the Norris cole stuff. He's an nba rotation guy only
did you see samuel eto's goal celebration? He took a reporters camera and started snapping pictures of his teammates.
#marijuana legalization xtra signatures to be turned into on Friday. Needed 2400 more. WIll turn in 12,000 plus
I would appreciate good vibes for tomorrow...I have my first real job interview for my career
A true friend would be honest to u even if he/she only known u for a month or 2 they would still care for you 💔
I AM 25!!! (in that voice you know )
No lines today at cedar point! It's been a great day!
“: Live your life and forget your age. Norman Vincent Peale”
You know what's gonna be weird? When my brother leaves for the marines. there is going to be so much more food in the house...
I heart pink slime! Lol!!
Do you ever work El Rio on Friday nights? They are so much better for me than Wednesdays!
RT if 0/5 of One Direction follow you.
we get to think of life as an inexhaustible well
Gonna need an evening cup of coffee...
I don't understand the collared shirt, athletic pants, and sandals look...
Seven Pepper Sirloin Steak Salad >
Is missing her grandmother very very much today. Can't believe it's been a year. Xo.
do you see how mad you got? She makes money off of you! :)
what? Why that's dumb
Read about Terracycle..on our blog at www.LuxeEssentials.blogspot.com
I totally agree!!
How about this 1 then... "Do not speak to me of rules. This is war! This is not a game of cricket!"
Rep. Peter King (R-N.Y.) outside House GOP meeting on payroll tax deal "most people were for it, or at least accepting." Vote prob this wk
Take me!(; : Me either :/ " Ohmy yes! I havent been there in forever! : *five gu"
900 likes!! <3 Thank you all!!
im not perfect ill piss u off say stupid things ,and then i will take it back ur never find find a girl that cares and loves u more than me
Whats a goon to a goblin
I usually went for Starman. Fighter Hyabusa was kind of nubby, but we liked calling him Fighter I-Abuse-Ya.
got it done thanks!
My mom may go with me she loves it there more than here too she is really thinking about it now lol
Hm. #needschangeofaddressforms j/k
I recommend Systane for dry eyes.
: That's an interesting question. I'd think about it if I lived there.
I really wish my body would stop breaking down.
The Chula Vista Chamber strongly opposes Proposition C.
well seeing how I am neither ugly or naive.....hm imma go with not shallow
Today's class was over the Wife of Bath's Tale, which is always great. I like telling the awful "Patient Griselda" for contrast.
National Basketball Association Playoff Game Capsules - Chicago Tribune
Thanks for hooking us up with Looking forward to checking out some new office digs for MSM!
#ILostMyVirginityTo foreclosure.. It got me good :/ just be careful she's like a door nob more and more people are getting a turn...
The ELUSIVE Sessions miss! FINALLY!!
put it in some glasses, then drink it. Repeat as necessary.
Protesters circling Capitol chanting Our House.
Wassup with this block party
Who is the best #doctor you've ever had, ?
#sopastrike this bill cannot pass. Really cannot pass.
I would love to have the ability to puke out rainbows! That would be freakin' amazing! How about you?
Monday Night Football is back! The game will be on in the bar so stop on by.
Nicholas Vester, Craig Rogers and Brandon Largent all plead "not guilty." Each of their bond set at $10k. More updates at 4 & 5.
heard from coworker Lauren you are interested in Lots of good things happening, and we could use your expertise!
"You can do anything, but not everything." -David Allen via
Did I need to download four CDs worth of the Revolver recording sessions? No. Did I do it anyway? You're goddamn right I did.
put up some new songs
another great draft for the pack
"Any of y'all know what type of snake this is?" = country music scene social media gold.
Wow, i was just thinking this...
Man cannot remake himself without suffering, for he is both the marble and the sculptor. Alexis Carrel
I went to goberry yesterday.. #thinkingofyou and
My neighborhood has changed so much through the years! Visiting "Voices of Lombard St" at this afternoon to learn how!
and in the end we shall achieve in time/ the thing they call divine/ when all the stars will smile for me
So what you are saying is that we won't be seeing you for years to come. ;)-
Can someone explain to me what a #twittercrush is? I mean, from the way described it, it deserves to be AK'd.
I have a music consultant on board who has his own Album. I am co producer on a new Album. We have the contacts!
Saw you on the news a while back btw- you definitely should be makin more for fighting. Female fighters are so undervalued.
] Timothy Ferris on how to lose 20 lbs of fat in 30 days without doing any exercise
Girl, he obviously doesn't want you anymore! HE LEFT YOU!!! Why do you think he tells everyone that you two never dated?! Hm..
Alright. All caught up with #hbogirls and also addicted. LOVE.
and now Jason Stackhouse on New Girl!
#flapanthers where's the defense and attacking??? Come on boys!!
Tracey you need to hurry up. I want to post a Gee already. XD
Keep forgetting to say I hope you didn't mix single malt and milk. Get some Clan Macgregor for that shit.
Good luck getting out! ;-) You have survived #Coachella2012!
Who's winning tonight?
Same to you my man.
I'm very grateful to all of our loyal customers-both returning and new-for helping us succeed over the years to receive this award.
"Whatever happens, conduct yourselves in a manner worthy of the gospel of Christ" Philipians 1:27 Whatever happens......
Hope to see you soon! RT : Have not been in to visit in a LONG time. Need to correct that soon!
That groggy feeling when you wake up from a drug induced sleep. <3
casting Ocean City commercial tomorrow in OC & Rehobeth - all types. If interested in auditioning email picture to
You are the only real obstacle in your path to a fulfilling life. -Les Brown
i miss talking to the people i used to on twitter. #feeling invisible </3
not me!!
Ryan Secrest's face was priceless but the whole Sasha baron Cohen thing is so tired
I should be getting ready 4 work; AM Joe annoyed me so much I had 2 stop & tweet. So good to hear fr u this AM. Enjoy ur day!
Shows cancelled while we take a brief hiatus.
Any recommendations on what's the state of the art or where we are heading in the JSON as a hypermedia format space? /cc
lol. His face is harsh. But he's hot tonight!
that's the spirit (; The M4 ditch looks nice this time of year, nice and soggy..
Of course, Silly. I just hadn't told Caroline.
Hey folks, thanks for the follow (Laura & Mr Cranky Editor). Cheers!
hot chocolate with cinnamon
Never realized that sticky notes could be so useful!
Isn't EVERY cruise kind of a disaster?
Ha ha yes! Though I assume you heard that whole retraction on This American Life.
Stupid people..
Leave it to to find a Diggy Simmons reference in a tweet lmao.
Story of the day: Arlington bans leaf blowers completely from May to October!
Oh no! We're sorry you're having that problem-our awesome support team can help you troubleshoot! 1-855-466-2646 M-F 9AM-5PM EST
And thx #usvi for the bottle of cruzan rum!
TechCrunch Primer: A Crash Course In Cool Camera Apps
Or does hierarchy become become a game of numbers? Likes = expert.
Glad to hear! ... Comn good RT : How's ur recovery? Gonna be ready for #Olympics?
I resolved to only work on one project at a time!! I usually have too many under way simultaneously.
Blake Griffin and CP3 are now injured... Or was it David Stern?
Glad to hear that. Those challenges & obstacles aren't meant to stop you. You're strong. You'll get there. :-)
Then again I want chocolate.... Maybe both *_* orignial yogurt with some chocolate bits... Yeah, im hungry lol
The past is gone, the future is not yet here, and if we do not go back to ourselves in the present moment, we cannot be in touch with life
Buehrle Come on!!!!
I'm not gonna tell you to follow me but i will tell you that you should wear you glasses more 'cause i love them.#BeNERDY :D
#WGTTH will be on the Dylan Ratigan Show this Thursday (MSNBC - 1pm PST). It will be live from a large job fair in Dallas, TX.
I like my bitches like i like my Fries....CURLY
RT : im keeping u in my prayers,hope u feelbetter soon <3
uh happy mothers day?
He's so so. He can't sleep much I guess he's thinking too much about his illness. We have his medicine and food always on time.
in life you cant do nun but try man!
Beautiful performance by Itzhak Perlman and the last night.
Just write your check now old man - your #ChokingSperts have done it again.
Deleted TextWrangle and all my files now open with Textmate
Thanks so much, you're great
Old School Salsa at Madrigall Tonight!$5 cover before 10:30pm $5 cover all night if you check in with Facebook mobile!
better than Prozac
I'll give you my thoughts on Sulia... (click here for more)
Digging Rick Moody on pop music in Pynchon.
Absolutely. You should stop by PR 3.0 one of these upcoming weeks if you can free up the time.
RT : Q. How do you incorporate local food into your school lunch? A. Harvest of the month items + school garden items...
It feels like it's time for Haze!!!
You have a great night also. I hope the aloha spirit stays with you.
2012 winner of the family Easter egg hunt!
My rage is showing but do you have the balls to pay attention do you even know why I'm so angry at you
in nyc for another killer meeting. have i mentioned i love what i do?
I don't read the newspapers because they all have ugly print
Looking forward to seeing Train at The Lawn at White River tonight...
made the mistake of popping in downton abbey while I did the dishes... finding it difficult to get back to work...
In forever getting compliments on how healthy, straight, and shy my hair is^_^
OKC wants it BAD
Honored 2 B a favorite author!
NF follow back ?
i would love to come!!!! I'm gonna make it happen.
Just me, a bottle of wine, and some Grey's.
All them freaks and geeks......
It doesn't hurt to try.
this weekend my biggest goal is to go to a barnes & noble store and buy cooking books :)
At Verizon. Momma's Droid1 may have finally bit the dust!
Which is better, drinking a poison because you love its taste or denying the experience of pain for fear of what you might learn & feel?
you just want to melt down! i won't!! (putting my hand to my feverish brow) i won't! you won"t break me again! NO! got doughuts?
Thanks! I will.
there he is Mr.Incredible!!
WHY r u awake and is today day 1?
Don't forget to check out The Center at the Ohio Bridal Expo this Sunday 11-4 at the Savannah Center in West Chester!
Writing a report on Russia <
Done, done, and DONE!
A whole lot overwhelmed at the moment
I have 4 children. I sometimes wonder which of the two are the aliens on earth.
Happy birthday
Laws out tonight damn !
GREAT READ! - Article - “Power of Play” by Karen Cernich Come join us at South Shore YMCA for Passport to Play! Be ready to play,...
Great twinbill today on ESPN : Ohio State at Kansas then THE MAIN EVENT BIG BLUE vs the IU want to be's !!!!!!!! GO CATS !!!!!
that can be a real beneficial project & be real inspirational. I heard you a great humble guy from your friend David walker. I>>
hey there! Shoot me an email at bcash @ schellgames.com
Continuing the assessments in Delray Beach tonight.
We found love on the radio. I exit taxi
Good to hear!
Nuts are a great source of protein and healthy fats, stock up on them!
1 more follower to 200. Anyone?!!
yup(: and I'm planning a summer weekend vaca at myrtle with a lot of people u trying to go?
whats up with all of the philosophers on here tryna kick knowledge every tweet....what yall god body? lol
positive thinking yes! OK...let's do it! LOL
Jennifer Velasquez workshop tomorrow - give teens leadership opportunities, gain collections and programs they will support....
luuuul my sister just said "Zayn Malik is not a god" can you please come to my house and beat her up?
maybe that's next, I will have to go back and check
Wouldn't surprise me if John Groce is next Duquesne Head Coach. Very close with Greg Amodio, Duquesne AD.
I think I'm only 3 hours ahead. It's 4:15 here right now ...
What up Durantula!
This man at the pharmacy center just yelled out , TRYNA GET MY DRUGS ! lbvs
Its friday!!!i know im late,but lets celebrate!!!!
Day 3 of the 4 cat household. The visitors are making themselves at home, but the residents are still having hissing fits.
LibrarySkills has drawn a winner of Kindle Fire - Maria L. Gonzales - Roosevelt HS - pick up from booth
yo bro, i bought some beats off you, im still waiting on them
Listening to at Northwestern U. Finally started, despite mic failure. Mic's unnecessary.
Of course Camberdella isn't here #alwaysabsent don't know why I bother coming to this class
cute dress!
I don't like it but understand NBA superstars have decision-making power. But I hope DHoward is going to be in ORL if he is calling for this
Lazy day.
The Deficit that lies within...lovingkindnesswc.org/?p=1148
week 5 of 9 in running plan, things are about to real tomorrow and fast, i hope i can actually do it. :/
Heading to Key West to escape the summer heat in Baltimore...
I absently asked google "what should I get delivered to Dave's office?" and it wasn't able to give me a response. Stumped ya google
Thoughts: 3- Tried the steak sandwich thanks to , and I wasn't disappointed. A great buy. Maybe next will be the parfait..
#quitmyjob I can dip dip dippity dip dip all I want!
The Swing Salsa Tango Party Is Back! 1st Friday of Every Month - 9pm-1am @ The Hemingway Gallery - 103 West 19th Kansas City Missouri
Do you feel weird when underage girls flash you?
this one is gonna be a big one $$
My biggest pet peeve is when people throw things at me.
Bertuzzi: Great at shootouts, even greater at sucker punching.
Just got off the phone with I'm really excited about one of their bands that will be on #eto Volume 3 in January...
:'''( ... #IStillBelieve RT : So if United loses the title to Man City, , & will be upset?
since when are you a blonde?!
when ur the first one to complete an assignment, ur about to get up an realize u gotta #RandomBonerInClass so u sit ur ass back down haha:'[
You are creating prosperity when you share in prosperity. President Barack Obama
Starting to feel it in my legs all the running around 2day..gd exercise though n we had a blast!
she's totally missed the value in what you do.
14 hour of driving school helped sharpen my skills!
Yeah, so we have the 10th. I leave 11th in the morning.
Great work my friend!
Happy MLK Day. Honor, Reflect, Act.
Get well soon! Love your tweets.
awh. Your so sweet to Think of me on my birthday!! 😘
Maki and Luis performing as Cheshire and Alice from #aliceinwonderland!!
All about my business... if you are too, then we relate
#NW - The Other Guys. This shit is so fucking funny!
4 day weekend just started Vegas weather is acting nice today it's sad when hi 90 degree weather feels cold
i dont think i can deal with this much longer :/ but then again it would be a waste of my past 2yrs 9mths and 8days
I've been following you,can you follow me
Washing tractors<<<
#BlackGirlsRock love it!
at Bisnow breakfast learning how associations build non-dues revenue.
We do ship to NJ, the states we don't ship to are listed on our website
Last time you saw me I was in the blue thing with a supermodel, now I'm in that new thing with a newer model
Great Information Kit-Cat Contest for Dealers Giving Fans of the Popular Clocks a Chance to Ride in 2012 Tournament of Roses® Parade FOU
at the beta convintion
That sounds like confirmation to me!
15 more days!!!! please find away to speed up time!! K, thanks 
What are you practicing today on your #guitar?
Guilty on all charges. Waiting for State's Atty Anita Alvarez to comment.
The 8 Mile final rap battle: designed to be Derby handicapping music, actually. ... "That's a private school."
Do not follow where the path may lead. Go instead where there is no path and leave a trail. Muriel Strode
Life's too short. You should start collecting your cats now.
SWEET! today is a high of 70°F - We are loving this #Albuquerque weather! Ride on friends!
Only a few spots left in the wine workshop (TOMORROW!). Sign up today at
NEW DELHI IS OPENS TODAY AT 11:30 AM
haha totally true!
That's awesome! I guess you're going to tell me you're a Pisces too? lol. Drogba is so fun to watch...
Works for me!
has he literally not seen the wire xmfd...isn't this the kid that prances around pretending to have good taste..tsk tsk
That's deep. This reminds me to praise him in spite of and to dwell on his promises - the seen and unseen. Thanks.
Thanks Kevin.
RT : ON CAMERA to bystander: "How bad is the wind right now?: #Andy Fox
don't know. Ask Bob L!“: Do you think we'll see highs below 55 again this season?”
Anyone interested in 2 free chihuahuas with a years worth of food and all the other crap? A friend is looking to get rid of his
With two-way prayer, I'm no longer alone.
RT : Planned parenthood is an abortion mill for Profit despite their status.// That doesn't even make sense!
Exhausted from filing
Hi! Is this John Hinze from WC? This is Marianne Pleticka
and likewise the Womb Sauna loves and promotes your work as well. Much love to you!!!
I as in iodine??? Lololol
yeah! Just for a few days tho!
Ladies' Night at the Savoy Kisses!
reporting that Jameson's plan to purchase team will be annouced before Game 5 by Bettman and Jameson
WOW! well, i have quite a few options to look into now! thanks :)
Do you have what it takes. Ladies sign up for THE EROTIC CHALLENGE and lets find .com
Im in love with ;)
Anymore? You could stand them in the first place?
Aw shit!! I ALMOST tweeted that SAME thing! How wierd would that've been?!?! Hahaaha
what channel is Good Burger on???
Road trip!
: Its like we went back 50 years. What is up with the backlash against women?
MUST SLEEP!!!!
Least all my pictures and dawn's are real. Like WTF. Use google and finding pictures and say there you? that's messed up.
Well i guess it is your hair, you paid for it !!
Missed Margarita Monday tho...
and the teddie photo?
you are an old shriveled up pile of crap. Obama has screwed up this country so bad and you support him. Who's the moron?
Apparently 5 minutes is the new 45 seconds.
you're the only reason I'm watching American idol rn
Indexing the NYU book...it is going better than my first stab at indexing...but not all that much fun on a Wednesday night!
What are you doing the rest of your life? The North and South and East and West of your life.
thanks! My sister took it :)
Silver Stars lead Minnesota 23-17 at halftime
This weather is beautiful and confusing.
I never know what to post on facebook anymore.
How do you get a baby to go to sleep
M Krystals.......my old and missed friend
RT : oh hush it turtle LOL!// lol no you're Turtle remember?
Grading grading grading grading.
Through Thursday? Get well.
Is the weeknd's birthday on the weekend this year?
Savoring last few days home before heading back out w/ and co. Lil' Rock Wed. Let's do this!
I've seen them show up within a few minutes, after someone tells me they got it, to 4-5 hours. Then some just show up
would be cool to see hashtags africa tweets even if i need help translating
Harker Dirge pins Torrac Hayes with the Dirt Nap.
omg have I told you about the squirrel I got in a fight with!?
Finished the 1/2. Feeling pretty shitty but happy that I accomplished it!
What you resist, persists.
Saturday night, chilling and listening to some vintage radio. It's a good thing. Alcohol may be involved soon, so watch out for wackiness.
200 activists camped out in central Moscow to protest the election of Vladimir Putin and arrests of opposition leaders.
fair play to Liverpool.
The Mayor's Youth Townhall on Athletics @ Deanwood Rec. Ctr. was awesome! DC Youth Rock!!!
How many requests for personal loans do you get daily from your 5,628,452 followers on Twitter? I have an over/under bet going.
Totally. It's really good. It took way too many people giving praise for me to check it out.
You're welcome! Have a great weekend in beautiful MI!
Thanks! I'll have it to you in a little while.
merry christmas eve hope u get every thing u want tomorrow ♥Ơ̴̴͡.̮Ơ̴̴̴͡
Same here except that many very large public libraries still use Dewey. Mostly colleges us LC
make my sister get a Twitter.
Thank you so much!
Ok, so is adorable!(: k? thanks bye
I need your body right here, won't you teleport to me 🎶
Or, at the very least, that he has no twinges of conscience about it. I remember so many crappy things I did with horror.
I hate when you leave.
Totally false that Ann Romney didn't have job--all those nannies, gardeners, cooks, drivers, in all those houses--If Mitt let her have say
Looking forward to #TheLorax. Gotta be better than The Cat in the Hat movie.
whoa just realized it's friday the 13th.
Opening night of Annie! :D
heyy :) what's up?
Its my way or no way when it comes to marriage
We're loving all the Hollywood excitement outside today! Come bowl a few games, you might see some A-list celebrities while you're at it!
When I was younger I use to think Reno 911 was real like Cops I dont know why because the show is pure fuckery lol
Do you want new clients to your business or you are looking to grow an existing business?
If you cannot work with love but only with distaste, it is better that you should leave your work.-- Kahlil Gibran
After CP3, our series MVPs are Reggie Evans and Eric Bledsoe. I'll just leave that in your brain for a second...
I hope had a Great
Twitter is all the rage on the internet, but it's not just a cool toy
A hearty congratulations to Steve "Saz" Sazama for being named Southern Wisconsin Restaurant Association's Restauranteur of the year!
Ann Arbor I am in you!!
Tnks! Can't wait 2 ck out . Sounds amazing! Love 2 cycle!!
Don't hold strong opinions about things you don't understand.
The fact that there is a plant that looks like a bird is just awesome!
Design for Change (DFC) RT : What was the PBL / student led project website you shared that TIES earlier this year?
Hush. HTML is fantastic, simple, and hand coding is the only way to go :-P
I want her to like my friend though XD.
Nothing is more American than, Tax Evasion.
Stonewall + bagels. , thanks to you, Tricia and Nomi for the great weekend!
Perfection is the enemy of good enough.~ Travis Jensen
I keep hearing about that book, but haven't read it yet. Someday!
janey say hi to shawn he being shy today hahaha!
yeah that is a sick remix
Yeah if anyone who reads this needs to get at me, I'm good on heytell when i have
alright just making sure you're happy! :)
Anytime I get a tweet like that, my day is made. xoxo. So fun hanging today.
I just shed a tear.
new to twitter! introduce me to people :D
prove it
You know what, Staples? Keep my $38. I get shell shock when I enter your store.
I'll be your row boat, you'll be the Queen Mary.
If you could have us personally serenade you, what would you want us to sing?
I love that song by Madonna Miles Away.. b.c. it's so true.
Happy Mothers Day (:
Mini-fridge stocked with beer and wine. Bar stocked with rye and single malt Scotch. Merry, merry Christmas.
Why do people say they have nobody? Pretty sure I'm still here.
Great job by & the team opening in South Philly tonight. First #PhillyRising meeting in 4 languages!
Come on #SDSU! Don't let me down!
RT 2 be free means the ability to deal with the realities of 1's own situation so as not to be overcome by them. - H.Thurman
Socializing for the sake of social media
Knowing youll never be fully gone
I am not a whore #butiliketodoit oh gosh
Got called back for tempODYSSEY by Dan Dietz.
Happy Friday!
as soon as they got on the plane I knew that was going to happen. Still ... WTF!!!
Sometimes the questions are complicated and the answers are simple. ~ Dr Seuss
If money was a crime was then I confess- lil kim
did u ever play that game with a piece of paper and I want to say on top you put mash? Then write who u gonna marry, ect
FOLLOW HER PLEASE! I WILL SEND UR NAME TO JUSTIN AND AUSTIN!!! <3
The power of kindness is immense. It is nothing less, really, than the power to change the world. ~Daphne Rose Kingma
Tylonol is my new best friend CountryGirl:)
well thank you! that means a lot to us. we really appreciate it! check this out too...music vid! www.youtube.com/socontagioustv
If you ask me NO phone is better than another. What the hell they all work the same way so stop praising different phones
There's 3 people that I know I can always turn to for anything: and ! Love y'all, thank you <3
i think my grandpa is part american indian
and sorry for being weird and creepy today
I feel like a ticking time bomb...this baby could come at any time (according to signs leading to labor). The waiting game begins....
pretty much!!
Yep, at least that's the way I understood it to be when I lived there in 1981.
Even though it's fucked up I'm still fuckin wit ya.
Waiting for my ride to school
so rude. ESP. Bc the phone glows in the dark
Baraka is an amazing film!
Light control systems let you use just the right amount of light reducing electricity usage and extending bulb life -- GO GREEN!
teams don't get too many transition buckets on em... Hard to score on em in half court and they run their offense perfectly
wow i just realized that when you move to Miami you're gonna have to take all the fan posters done?
Had a good lunch with two awesome women tamra roby and raylene Jones( ray) gotta love cheese cake factory
thanks for the introduction. Appreciated.
that is so messed up!!!
Did you get it now
I've got some issues that nobody can see and all of these emotions are pouring out of me
All i do is ME
If you work with singers who are not an ocean away, I'd suggest writing for them first, OR find a bb at your end...
well I say more power 2 u :)
Just finished a character building run with a great cast of characters #runla stop rain stop
I edited a press release about myself today. Glad to say it was superb. Thanks
"Life begins at the end of your comfort zone." Neale Donald Walsch
Awww!! Have fun!
Weeding observation of the day: Dog books are more popular than cat books.
How crucial is it for the #Spurs to maintain a lead in tonight game, especially since they are playing on the road?
20 degrees colder today than yesterday for bicycle commute. No wonder I have a closet full of different cycling togs.
I know they are soo mad LOL
One of my favorite days of the year is tomorrow.
No one can take away what they haven't given you.
Never been so confused in all my life.
I'm a huge fan #pray is my favorite song also #neverSayNever and #baby are my top favorite songs
Alright this will be an even better birthday if can wish me a Happy Birthday today!:D
Today was so good - sleeping in, long walk in the park, burgers and margaritas... happy.
no there isn't you have to wait til i get home!
Something tells me neither of u can ball
Good morning guys :) Have a great day! #HappyHalloween! :) Have fun!!!
Excited about on tomorrow! Passion and intensity on the agenda, I hope!
JUST CAME BACK FROM MY FIRST CHEERLEADING TRYOUT!!!<3 WOAAHH IT WAS SO MUCH FUNN :P
Waiting at the genius bar, my computer is thirsty
"Just b/c you are center of campus doesn't mean you are central to academic mission" repositioning LTS
G O O D M O R N I N G to my amazing Brother! :)
all I have to say is.. Ron Burgundy
Ms. Dolan…Please Realize That”Good Morning, I’m Not Wearing Any Underwear” Is “Not” How We Answer The Phone Here At Citibank…
thank you (:
 more followers than I have  followers please help have that goal and I will follow u back please 
"Your statement is ready" is my least favorite email subject line! :(
Accidentally drunk. Dancing with a pup to Heart in the kitchen.
the only news i ever read
WANT A HOT PENNY STOCK TIP that'll change your life? "LUSI.OB"! They have HUGE things in the pipeline!
Anything goes in the world of make-believe.
Which Pym novel would you recommend as a first read to a BP newbie with a kindle and some vacation time next week? Thank you!
One day into the relationship and I have already made him mad... I asked him how old he was and I told him how old his cousin said he was...
lol we cool, just had to mess with u, haven't done it in a while....
The A. Philip Randolph Pullman Porter Museum is full of history
can't wait to see a doctor about my shin
Lendy Castillo is "hurt" and going on the DL. LOL, it was a matter of time before Maine was recalled and Lendy caught a phantom something...
I'm dumb -____-
you want me to type them a letter so you can show them lol
Thanks - looking forward to #sparkandhustle & we are spreading the word!
will you please follow me grand man:)))<3
from where??
awesome! hey, congrats on the babies!
Today's gonna be an awesome day, weather feels absolutely AMAZING that means windows open, Ghost Busters just came on, and decorating later!
Criterion for value is whether or not something adds to or advances the human condition--Ikeda, Soka Education.
Victorian Halls at Chicago's own Friday, Jan 27 with $7.
thoughts on commercial last night? moved to tears or not very impactful?
a few drams of single malt are a great cure for hiccups.
We have liftoff! Jackie's 2nd baby tooth just fell out :)
Taj Mahal for authentic Indian cuisine...Central Expressway. My senior mom thought the house wine was toxic however.
Chubby girl wants. Now.
STRANGER DANGER
The only benefit to running a "clean" campaign is to win that small segment of persuadable indy voters. You will never (1/2)
Isn't it crazy the things we say we will never do , we end up doing?
This sh*t blasted off to 2011 HA HA! Rocca Bar let's go!
Sad to hear about ted kennedy
#NOWFOLLOWING TaylorGanG Creator of Thee Bo$$et Movement Loyalty over Riches..Business over B*tches & GOD above ALL
picked up the PBR right next to the Wrangler jeans. Real.Comfortable.Beer.
Stupid question. Can you write a check for prom tickets?
And instead of a becoming a magazine, you'd be competing in Sectionals this semester.
I got it!
just imagine her in a couple years
RT morning, though its evening already here hehe :) ": Goodmorning :)"
And we're back for act two. A rather somber beginning. But very necessary given the subject matter.
Is the printer being a jerk again?
The #Bruins have had some chances, still not good on the PP. Joe Corvo still scares me on defense. Need to score 1st
Follow back ? :/
I endorse this desire.
lets make it happen! hook us up!
good night sis love ya!
Yay! We got inside! :D
why is my internet so slow! I can't even play Pandora :(
OMG - I can't wait -need to set my Tivo!
yay! We can learn together!
spread the word about #stopkony ?
#RiseofthePlanetoftheApes . such a great movie. "Caesar is home"
Brandon - Impossible to verify All his moves.
Watching shoot video!
Did u c the Bube Brewery on TAPS? lol. RT : Boobs.Bewbs. Thats rely the only point to this tweet. ( . ) ( . )
Enjoy the summer day...much cooler tomorrow.
Vegas real estate is still a bargain!
i have no idea what tht is lol
Relapse? Happens to the best of us. Well talk :) Keep ya head up!
famine poverty death life
Trying To Figure Out what kind of animal someone looks like ..
It's just really unfortunate for those of us who live here.
Like #mayweather in 12 with a unanimous decision
i love my nerdy moments <3
It's a beautiful day in the neighborhood! Ready to jump on the treadmill.
#first40songsonshuffle 15. Forever Young - Jay-Z ft. Mr. Hudson
40% of people will decide based on a church's online presence whether or not to even walk through the door.
In any situation know what your getting yourself into.
Ok. Third game. They split the first two.
Drink Responsible!!!
QoTD: "There's no such things as coulda, shoulda, or woulda. If you shoulda and coulda, you woulda done it." (Pat Riley)
RT "Real G's move in silence like Lasagna!"
I still can't believe that it all starts tomorrow
To all you lions fans out there I wanna know what y'all got to say I mean really
definitely. Inspiring stuff.
bye its so boring :)
And I thought I was the only one who had the 1st Harry Potter hanging around un-opened. Good luck with it.
Washington Nationals are now at 5 wins in a row and counting after beating Marlins 12 - 8 today
Big Thank You to for Saturday Night! My Birthday was a blast!
Give the independent Musician a chance he/she dont have million dollar record labels behind them but the Musicians are just as talented.
Mo' tweeting mo' shopping for us both. March 8: 60% off for users w/ scores b/w 41-60 (up to $75)
ha ha actually no, even though I am a huge sex in the city fan that one was so awful!
Welcome to the Annenberg family! Looks like we have lots to geeking out to do.
#HookMeUp with them watch the throne tickets!!!
OH from a 5 YO in the pking lot: You mean you don't telemark? Laughter & pride from the telemark-dad ensued. cc
Thanks for the follow, Look forward to your services.
#HonestyNight if i wasnt in a relationship i would have been moved to another state
Let's get some runs. Jesus.
I feel like I need a after that lunch.
wait ive already been There done that. They Love phuckin wit a youngstas mind forget that idea
TODAY 12PM in RM6304.01: Dagny Stuedhal on nordic digital media based approaches to participatory museums with youth groups
I'm pretty sure I was turned away from a doctor today because they misunderstood my health insurance. I call this
Watching speak on Social Media on News4 DC #DCTech - nice job.
I spilled coffee right down my white shirt. First hour of work. Goodbye looking cute and professional. Hello Sweatshirt.
We are heading to #aladanceparty at Apex Club. We will see YOU there!
interesting piece. I expected something a little different, more sense of schol as distributed vs individual, zero-sum
'Nexus' by Henry Miller, the 3rd book in the rosy crucifixion series. His long saga with June continues on and on and on...
Looks like C's-Sixers is gonna go more than 5 games. No way will Philly win the next 3.
Race for the Cure on-line registration closes 9/17 @ 12 noon. www.komenorgon.org
Lotta good people doin things tonight! Good friend and good dj spinning records, and sellin shwag!
Not funny! RT : Greg Oden already down w knee injury.
thts good. They all do tht. Ur nephews over here be fightin each other. Smh
They know who they are :)
I followed back!:)xo
If you think 2011 was great, Wait until you see what Rocktagon has in store for 2012!! Happy New Year
oh there was a great Roadhouse Reference on it last Thurs.
Sharing your blog w/ friends only to find out they've already bookmarked & discussed it over lunch without knowing it's yours.
Omg! I would never have the nerve! You're a badass Ryan!
I AM AND I LIVE IN AMERICA. Is that even normal? lol.
I belong to no organized party. I am a Democrat.
At Chik-Fil-A... Has Christian music really changed that much in the past 20 years? So much for the "new CCM" sound... 1-4-5 U2 wannabes.
Tire the zombies out for me, please.
Happy Birthday ! Make it a great day my friend. ;-}
Still competition baby xD
Well... I did predict Caps in 7... whatever...
did you do what I told you?
lol well I'm glad that I'm not old then
I'm coming! : I'll be at Figueroa Produce tonight to get my grocery shopping on! Vegan peeps - join me!
Hey looks like it's no sleep for the both of us! Except mine is because I'm sick and can't breath. :/
Excited for the legendary Tom Dreesen's 5 pm show at the today!
best Monday ever
hi chris❤
That is awesome news, Art! Please bring the ducks!
umm..everything ok? I hope that your day gets better :)
yea 2hrs later on my fne
Hate not being able to sleep, so much on my mind 👎
Careful out there, tweeps! Still getting lots of phishing DMs. Don't click any "is this you" or "you look funny here" links!
yeeeeh.... haha wow i just read ur tweet.... it took u 3hrs ??!!! thats crazy ........ good thing we left lol
A thunderstorm on Oaks day is like a Terd in the punch bowl.
After a date with a ribeye and bottle of Malbec, I'm calling it a night. Good night, kinky world!
The awkward moment when you are not following the funniest account on twitter. Follow for some best tweets on twitter <3
You're welcome. Some very thoughtful blogs. Like My molehills are others mountains. :)
Good Morning my twitches. #NP Akinyele - Put It In Your Mouth. You can't not smile....
That's awesome! Is he yelling about gold prospectin'?
Money dont change you... It just changes the people around you... - Lottery Ticket
haha, I was awake 2 write a paper #thatscollege but I'm always down 4 a run. Get'n me 2 row is the challenge,
Maybe it's just my lack of patience. No, that's it.
I get sick of girls fast
Good mornin yall ... Remember than u can make anything right if u keep faith in whoever and wat ever ur dealing with
All these juniors taking the front parking spots.
If Nene mentions Glee one more time...
shock me like a fucking eel
THERE ALWAYS REMAINS AN OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE A NEW START. ~NHill
Mustangs a select team
Procrastinating.... My jog....
U Already
Why do you think it's a bad idea?
We're about ready to dive in w/questions, so shout out to Jamie to say hello & so he knows you're here!
so good to see last night. He has some VERY cool things about to come down for you. Watch closely!
When I text "imy" I be dead serious
Accused of things that just aren't true. It hurts.
Dear student: One advantage to proofreading is taking out the note to yourself admitting you don't know a major course concept.
O.o you suck at a video game?
Am I reading this right? Blazers new head coach was a video intern 8 years ago? There's some serious upward mobility in that organization.
Welp... I think I have enough episodes of The Facts of Life recorded to get me through my divorce. Want to come over?
- Thanks - Looking forward to reading your Mag!
Coming up at 6 - we talk to 2 officers who pulled a man from a fiery crash. What they were awarded that made them thankful - at 6.
. Thanks for the thoughtful recommendations! Looking forward to my first fest film this evening.
Oh the weather outside is frightful but Amici's is so delightful. If you've no place to go, join us 4 some Joe! dinner + coffee drinks = yum
I miss you so much :(
LP Nation, there will be a Pop Up Shop tomorrow from 2-5 with FREE MASSAGES & gift shopping for all your holiday needs!
In case you're wondering, I'm not packing heat.
haha happy early birthday! Have fun!! 😂😏😉
Watching ignorant imbeciles emphatically agree with each other about some minuscule shit
Try the hot toddy, and if you wish, let me know how it works for you. It is certainly soothing and helps one sleep! :-)
Next person to use the word swag is getting shitted on.
If just told you that I love you more than cheerleading,
Thanks for the faves and RT's.
I have honestly been watching Pretty Little Liars all day... I can't wait any longer.
If a cow can't eat it, I don't want to play on it.
just got to the hotel tired af
and if you fall over the slippery slope????
John Travolta's Masseuse RT : Sometimes it's best to turn the other cheek. and sometimes a baseball bat to the head is called for.
Afraid not, the earliest I could do is 8 my time.
Yay! All are shows have been amazing! :D I still need to see The Secret Circle!
Can I see your headphones real fast?? Uhhmm..... Suure.... End of class period in 10 minutes. Wtf. Nobody can use them ever again.
hahaha.....totally worth it!..have fun.;o)
thank you!!! Your food rocks our world.
Happy Valentine's Day!
Passive tracking will be future of high-tech, social fitness. Systems will provide such value that we'll want to provide more data.
pfft I've already been in Texas.
How can anyone think Bert and Ernie are gay? They're just two heterosexual puppet men sleeping in the same bed, while being fisted 24/7
Keep up the good work, I'm glad I stumbled onto your site.
just glade its a hoilday listeing to spin raido online. :)
Thanks! Randy's recipe is incredible!
on the writer side or as a customer? Please email us at and we will get you sorted out.
CAN'T WAIT FOR THE WNBA!!!!
GIRLS NIGHT OUT- OCTOBER 19TH VENETIAN MASQUERADE BALL- OCTOBER 29TH
What doesn't kill you makes you stronger.
Hope everyones Sunday is great!
Hewerton scores his 2nd of the night (assist to Liete) as keeps piling it on 24-8 with 2 minutes left
it's stressful. go bulls.
RT Down and Derby tonight at the Beauty Bar! See you there! 10pm. More info at www.downandderby.org
Hey there, (kiranveeranki), thanks for the follow! Hope you're entertained by what you read here!
We've been too busy to tweet thanks to you all! Nice to see actors getting busy and needing headshots! DM for your Twitter discount code.
one opportunity, one moment
Yeah...it was stressful. You know how High Strung I can get lol
thanks Luis. We should be putting up some more soon!
That's great! What's the hardest part of learning English for you?
high school kids can def come as work crew - hit up for info on WC for
Seriously, don't be a stranger!
Thanks to the DB who dumped my entire drink... ON MY HEAD. Looking real classy now. Worst part...he didn't offer to buy a new one.
Bro said can he go all the back to Larry crib because he left 10 cent lmao
Ready to rock tonight! 8pm at Christy's Biergarten...join us!
hahah i know victor!!
Are you going to the game friday?
Justin Bieber is part of the #MoneyTeam I guess
thank you!
Imperfection is beauty, madness is genius and it's better to be absolutely ridiculous than absolutely boring.
aww Louis Ill send you some <3
Hey if all the talk is true about #Illuminati this is an official shout out. MAKE ME FAMOUS! I'M READY TO SELL OUT!
PACKERS got Jeff Saturday..good ass pick up
RIP Dick Clark, NYE will not be the same without you.
spoke too soon!
I heard that one. SO CREEPY.
just pissed me off
no worries and thanks :)
Did you have a good time last night dancing with Wanda Acosta at Thom Bar? Thanks for coming out & checking in on Foursquare!
Warren's beard is 3/4 back.
lmao I want to meet him so bad! And him be like u! Ur the one! Omg I would die and seriously Vin and u I can see it!
Off to school ! Oh joy -___-
I am totally stoked about being introduced in NJ for the Cape May #marac meeting.
Okay Lol. O.o
don't say it doesn't matter cause it's gonna matter to me <3
Should I call her? I have her number
Damn, did I say SF drummer Jon Avery? Ack! It's Jon Arkin. Sorry bout dat!
Girls are so shallow.
I'm so craving a pickle right now...
Metta World Peace suspended for 7 games. Starts with the Lakers next game, April 26, vs. Sacramento.
"Waiting for Nirvana" was ridiculous. Pop music is MALL MUSIC. Great bands get overlooked because industry is LAZY.
Wondercon was fun, but definitely just a warm up for SDCC.
is back... just wasnt his time.. lets go...
Or: Thinking third parties could ever work in first-past-the-post systems.
And the Grammy producers thought they were set for tomorrow night #better get the coffee
waiting for my granddaughter to get back from florida after a visit with her father. always on pins and needles. she is love of my life.
Lunchtime is YOUR time. Bite into a Premium Chicken Sandwich or Angus Deluxe & taste freedom.
I am ANTICIPATING your mid day mix tomorrow!!!
Great win! ROCK CHALK!
Crowley scores again for Philly. Making the match a close one in the final minutes of the game.
get your network running up to par with the big guys
hey, a friend of mine might need a temporary or permanent home for her puppy while she searches for a house...any interest?
"Cabbage: Life is Elsewhere."
Also, you are probably handsomer, though I have not seen recent photos of Mr. Pedia to compare.
#edshow AL GORE breaks record by creating more TOXIC HOT AIR than small NUCLEAR PLANT
waiting on him to get back with my car.
idk but we should all chill
In the meantime did anyone check out "The Innkeepers"? The Ti West film? what are some comments and opinions?
the long 15 second fart that dale does during the interview >>>>>>>>>>> HAHAHAHHAHAHA!
Google beefs up Apps Scripts for Docs - Ars Technica
Jesus, America. How in the hell is Ron Paul not running away with this thing?
Oh, yes! RT Coffee quote for the day - I drink coffee for your protection.
Tune in at Noon for Radio. This month's show features stories from the February Story Slam when the theme was "How We Met"
no it's healthy milk! Duh
if it was easy, everyone would do it
Hi good morning :)
You both dont have the consistency to stop me.
I can't possibly imagine who that could be. Hm
thank you!
I'm learning so much about wood and leather....at the shop. Soon to be open. Heck have buyers now. :-)
Actually, Neko's reaction was mixed...at best.
Hairy Christmas
you're willing to watch a 4 hour long chick flick for the beck of it??:O How are you still Single???? Lol
I'm gunna get bit by that turtle, knowing my luck.
A win for The Newt is a win for Obama haha
"Can you do me a favour?" Normal people: Sure. Directioners: Does it involve the buttah sock?"
I work there at the bowling alley
have you heard Tori Kelly's cover of it ? If not listen to it now!!
Thank you for the compliments , I do a lot of commissioned works as well, if you are interested let me know. Mark
i really dont even know, i think it was for talking while he was explaining something about the track
Teardrops playing at cascada! I love this song! So blissful.
RT : How's your shoulder doing? 1 word: PAIN. Ha Its ok, really painful, but I'm dealin. Hows ur last. SF wk?
Building the playlist for tomorrow's #tailgate at the #HuntRaces. It's a mix in every way...
serious question... If u had to replace one player on skc with a RSL player... Who would it be?
That's Adorable.
I will try to make that as apparent as possible. 4 thousand dollar software! That type of software isnt on bit torrents for the most part..
Try not to become a man of success but a man of value. -Albert Einstein
Lol at the people who are like "why don't you just tag me?" but don't tag the person that didn't tag them #ifthatmadesense?
have you sought any dry eye treatments ?
The meeting is at 9:30am at DHSP 600 S. Commonwealth Ave. SWOPLA reps will be in red to support recommendations of the Women's Collaborative
": Faith is the currency of heaven."
Definitely unmoored RT : Adam Yauch: the first celebrity death of the year that has left me completely unmoored...
Miami tomorrow, Vegas on Thursday!
(c) and to take attendance is like when we have to be with them. And we dont find out who our chaperone is till thurs.
I was just saying it as an FYI, nothing more, nothing less
Wantinf him.. but at the same time.. i don't want to get hurt.
Sorry to hear that. I can empathise. I've had a heap of pants-days since getting back from Chile. This is Catastrophe Month.
Another great voice lost, Donna Summer
these kids couldnt get any more hyper
I'm playing nba2k11 my player
is on a twitter rampage!!!
Staff pet portraits this morning for part of a Public Engagement project. Many cute dogs. Word is a hamster is on the way.
#WeAllNeed alone time with chocolate
For media. Fox sports will have on net.
I'm Bleeding All Over The Place...Somebody Help Me
Not at all lol, just gotta state the obvious
#IfYouReallyKnewMe : I'm one the sweetest girls you will ever meet but if you backstab me I will become the biggest bitch you have ever met.
or on a beach
RT : All things are difficult before they are easy. - Thomas Fuller
Thanks for ReTweetin' Poised Creation! We thought your were looking sexier!!
oh yessssir! Lol but bout to go catch the Heat game but when I get back we can run it fam
can't believe how fast this day is flying..maybe because i finally was given something to do at work!
Good day everyone! FDI Youngevity will be having an upcoming event (Super Saturday and Training this Saturday Oct. 1, 2011 , NC.
In shock. Whitney Houston was one of the greatest singers this world has ever heard. RIP
Merry Christmas
is that your boo ⛄
Today is a nice day for tanning .
Game ain't over, Bucks were down 12
happy birthday to the ground
Off of twitter for a few days and they done change the look. Damn Damnn Damn!
Is it crazy to run to ny for a spa appt in the name of free champagne
i'm 2007 as well. I was a Parkie, Cinema and Photography and an art history minor...I think we must have mutual friends!
#LAStageTalks Don gave shout out to bitter lemons.
Best way to describe the current strike zone of Mike Winters: cold.
Accidently typing Jimmy Dead frozen breakfast when you mean Jimmy Dean adds a whole new twist to the concept.
Thank you for your leadership!
butt Kicker
Jimmy Cliff is the musical guest on NBCs Jimmy Fallon - on right now!
Happy College Football New Year's everybody!
Mossberg love is excellent. Congtats on that. I'm still feeling all warm and fuzzy about the Time accolade.
SO excited for the launch of in April!
Last night was Incredible - thanks to Angelique and Blue n Green.... does it get any better?
The sun was shinin earlier, And now its black outside. The fuck?
TXT ME
Meh..very thin and watery- especially for a saison. I like the grape flavor but it's too weak and thin to be great.
Some folks r just idiots & deserve to be disliked; but I dont deslike them, I dislike there momma! Cuz it's momma's fault the idiot is here!
any tips for to make Hipstamatic stop crashing? If my photos are on high setting, the software crashes. even after reinstall
NClg Aa earned the Hey, Good Looking badge! via
Make Your Money!!!
“: morning! Rise and shine” What's good fam. When ya gunna hit me back
Thanks for the follow, Amy. Hope you have a wonderful weekend!
I always do
Rainy day....wish I was home in bed!
And i cant see shit to change it back -___- fuck my life right now, seriously.
It's time to fuck some shit up!
Just what did that poor tennis racquet ever do to you?
You know I'm just kidding, right?
please reply or follow me if you see this Justin(: it would mean so much to me!(: 💜
Upside: you laugh a lot w/husband thinking of things such as" why is Velcro toddler sleepwear is not invented yet"
U bet. BTW, am in new musical Monday at 45th St Theater. Bar Code is from Jim Rado of 'Hair' fame. Would like 2 C U if u can make it.
TELL HIM TO SING YOU THAT SONG
#oneofthesedays I will complete my NEW Cat Art!
Happy Birthday Kath. It'll be nice to see you on Friday.
oh my god... Hahahah that's scary
IM me when you're home / when you get this. :) gotta figure something out for this weekend!
Terrificly warm ovation for all nominees, who will receive their certificates (aka stunning little piece of bling) in 4-6 weeks!
We support and promote Practitioners of Holistic Medicine as a whole and becoming more prevalent and a stronger force in healing our society
Same to you. Everyday. Keep up your great work and mothering on the campuses with love and brilliance.
I just don't think coaches and/or fans always understand our jobs and our situations.
Thank goodness. Learned how to use a sunscreen and full-coverage foundation together that won't look ashy.
You can't have your cake and eat it too....or can you?
10 minutes #Gophers just 10 minutes
Everyone is getting a shout out from Rick Santorum... Now, !
I really hope this is my last trip to vegas ever.
You must have been here before, this can't be your first time.
yup...taking on the Astros of Houston
It's hard out there in the dating world. You get rejected, you get laughed at, you get talked about behind your back. Does that make onli
hell yea smh loaded then a hoe....no where to go ugh ugh siiiiiccck lmmfao
And is that a smile? Haha :)
I need sleep!
For those of you who I will be seeing later today: I think I'm coming down with the cold. Hug me at your own risk.
We'll talk about proposed legislation to expand access to abortions in California
understand the need to question who got in/who didn't, but completly agree - they gotta do the right thing and fast!
Guess how many breakfast burritos I've had today. Go ahead, guess.
ain't it a lil questionable
are u high!?
story of my life.
I'm writing the #EHR chapter in a new epidemiology textbook. What would your favorite section be?
Dude I had that call today too…. wtf
I also remember feeling that same way about Elder Scrolls back in 2002 :)
cooking. yum
.....Sorry.......I shouldnt have been so hard on you...I suffered the same injury...unfortunately not from a FERRARI
Staxx in my jeans.
I really liked it! kinda sad though, especially since its based on real people. I really want to read hunger games. thats next
There's never a bad time to listen to The Church's "Under the Milky Way," but right about now is probably the best.
there you go! Well put!
Glad you made it home. Man, that was quick!!!
TRAFFIC ALERT -- Car overturned on eastbound on I-4 near Longwood
depending where you are located, I can help by providing access to quality lawyers for a low monthly fee legallyspeaking.ca
lol that's funny :) I never meet anyone with our name!! 😊
When your healing strawberry itches like fuck <<
has snagged Lauren Cook from ! Lauren will now be the traffic reporter for "Good Morning Maryland"
We kept twitter and facebook silence until we could call/tell in person certain relatives/close friends.
Take chances. A lot of them. Cause honestly, no matter where you end up and with who, it always ends up just the way it should be.
A wise man told me don't argue with fools Cause people from a distance can't tell who is who
Your Amaaazinng! Love You :)
"perfect me" was perfect.
Last Dance...RIP Donna Summer
ok the new #dr.pepper commercial is #DISTURBING!! them men are ewwww
Kids love grandma. She relies on Social Security. Granny & gramps paid Social Security taxes their entire work lives. So do mom & dad.
that's actually smart thinking haha
Hello west! I think I am back on your time zone now. Glad to be here.
on my deck counting dolphins.
congrats winners!
First Blazers game I have deliberately turned off a min into the 2nd Q w/ no intention of going back to
You coning to court tonight ?
Newberg Fire ambulance with few.and patient involved in head on crash. Air ambance just took off w victim.
I'm with you, - I can't hand over another penny to AT&T. I use my iPhone as an iPod Touch and carry a 2nd phone for Verizon.
no1 is acting like "dude" has won something. Just "acting" like "dude" is 1 of da greatest ever. Whats da diff between the 2?
officially ends on Saturday
I needed a job to simply sustain my consumption
sure. c:
YES!!! In ya face Pittsburgh! Play dirty and pay the price.
Great to see the team (& office) today. The energy is palpable! cc
Well, how was the accompanist for you? Haha.
you are actually the best!!!
if we get tickets to see #Glee live, my life will be complete
name names
Congrats to Studio 24/7 actor Eric Davis who booked a commercial!!
neither, both piss me off because winning just means memorizing a bunch of bogus words
The honor and pleasure is mine. All my very best!
I have nutella, Be jelly. :3
I was kidding...but your Twitter avatar is so delicious, I had to oblige.
sure did! Twice.
Oh hey. :P
bachelorette premier may 14th! Oh and happy Easter :)
New wine glasses aim to balance "water and fire"
Have to fix the background later on today.. thanks for RT'ing me :)
Yesterday a 2 year old ran me over with a vacuum. Today she is "cooking" me dinner and dessert. And just informed me I had a phone call.
Today is the day! Headed to Memphis this evening to compete in the International Blues Challenge!
I hate the tokken "yelling loudly at losing team" guy, tonight there was a Pens fan yelling at Philly fans even after the loss. Dude, STOP!
Look at chu go ;D Looks amazing :)
Yes u better make ur grand entrance
Facebook has acquired Instagram, the popular photo-sharing application, for about $1 billion in cash and stock //
is looking for some awesome designers and developers. Skills: RWD, PHP, MySQL, Rails, JS, HTML, CSS, etc.. Hit me up guys….
Haha, love the new blog post. One note: as a kid I far preferred the grape Dimetapp. So that grape flavor can stay ;-)
Will definitely post pictures! I had the best experience at They were so nice!!
Go to tonight! Pick up some groceries and grab some grub at food trucks. is pretty tasty!
finishing projects and hitting SEND on the email button feels so good.
Apparently I stole David Bowie's bangs in the night.
Night all! Sleep well!
Just saw the remake of "The Thing". This time they used real Norwegians :) I liked it a lot, but my favorites are sci-fi/alien movies
Very soon tho (:
Money isn't real
lets get that first tweet.
Furniture at our second store on Main St gets marked down EVERY WEEK! Looking for something specific? Check us out or give us a call!
Jerzday. :) excited for.this weekend. :)
"Well, I guess that's worth a look." HOLY CRAP LOKI. OMG. IT ALL MAKES SENSE.
We are SO ready for June :D
My little boys b-day is this weekend. Got him RAW tickets. Anyone else gonna be there?
Smashing Tomato has more VPN Certified restaurants in Lexington than most states have! We love bringing you Authentic Neapolitan Pizza!
Hahaha it should! Not Safe for Anyone With Decent Self-Esteem...NSFAWDSE.
sure, followed:))
100% on my quality final!!! 😁
Enerchia tip of the day: Toasted ground chia seeds mixed with honey and cinnamon makes a great base for pie crust.
Let's do it!
Welcome back to KC my Friend Come over to the cauldron and say hi to we have really missed you this year!
Dang i missed the lunch :( RT Hell, let's all just meet for lunch at noon.
HAHAHAHA Z YOU HAVE ALWAYS BEEN HILARIOUS...
People cite the Bible easily enough across multiple formats, languages and editions. Chapter and paragraph seems reasonable.
Who here is a fan of the Mavericks? (band)
So many video views the counter is frozen! Keep bombarding kellieluvella.tv with viewing luv!!
Applications for Camp Challenge '12 are available now! Site coordinators have access! Email for more info
Strangest bedfellows: Roger Hedgecock writes op-ed for the U-T, paper that drove him from Mayor's office, and he has since despised.
How does one master hobo culture & lingo? What information sources does one use? Or does one simply ride the rails in like 1932?
This weather is superb! Be a greener runner and train outdoors - treadmills and stair climbing machines use a lot of electricity!
I'm at work! Why yes, yes it /IS/ Sunday! Thanks for mentioning it.
And so Friday evening begins!
Listen to some Whitney!
Aftr Richmond tonite we'll b @ the North Star Bar 2639 W. Poplar Street Philly Doors @ 9pm $10 21+ hope to c u there pass it along!!
Yes we have one life to live but its up to you on how u wanna live it. Rather u live it right or not your choice.
I can really see myself on stage pouring my heart out to mi fans one day i will but for now school is my main prioraty #future!!!
"It can be done." Colin Powell...ending on a positive note. GN
i never wear make-up so to wear it for prom..... i feel weird lol
aye g add me on tumblr vansndlevis96
why not let them know on ? #branddrops RT At&T has the worst customer service hands down
idk lol if i changed the way i write it people might not like it xD But i'll try that for my next story:D
wat happened to him?
The hardest part of acting like you dont care, is knowing how much you actually do.
Augmented Reality is going to be a big deal but it is still a young technology.
My wife wants to know the significance of the acorn. She is bloody killing me asking about it.
TY for the RTs , , ! Much appreciated. :)
My chocolate cravings are absolutely out of control during finals time
-in my clique. You are recieving this email because I think you have what it takes. TALK TO NO ONE ABOUT THIS. Or else. Luh-ve, Massie."-
:{ you serious?!
#Brokenhearted by is #19 on Ryan Seacrest's American Top 40 Radio :)
thank you!! Love you so much Nikki<3
Children: U spend the 1st 2 yrs of their life teaching them to walk & talk. Then u spend the next 16 yrs telling them to sit down & shut-up.
RT "I know when it is time to make a strategic retreat." -- Perry.
Astronaut John Glenn ate the first meal in space when he ate pureed applesauce squeezed from a tube aboard Friendship 7 in 1962.
Why did people stop talking to me?
Hit me up on Draw Something. Username: ernestorivera
I love technology ^_^
plz sort this fing out with sarah =)
We still dream show on Friday at the white rabbit on Friday! Hope to see you all there!
Thanks for fixing the photo shoot situation. Kudos for paying attention and great customer service.
#thoughtsduringschool why isn't this bayside? Where's Zack Morris? When will I meet nick Jonas?
Don't blend in Stand Out! Be-you-tiful (: ~ Maricarmen
are you pregnant? What did boo-boo do to you? Lol
will be live at 5/6pm from Riverwalk for the Capital City Classic then he throws the first pitch!
Every great leap forward in your life comes after you have made a clear decision of some kind. -Brian Tracy
my dog just ate my whole breakfast.
hahah ya I think I remember
What's the point of a sponge when everything you wash smells sponge-y?
Last night I dreamt the whole world shook violently and caught fire. An old asian lady laughed at me the whole time. What'd you dream about?
In the library until 5. I came prepared with my 60 oz of green smoothie. Maybe it'll make me think clearer? Who really knows.
thanks for the help! Cards made Brewers win possible...needed the help!
As much as i'd like to be with somebody, i should probably stop trying and spend this summer with the bros.
So true, I talk to him in the middle says, "He is making me do 6 breaths per stroke."... "Umm are you sure?"
I really need a hug. And for someone to tell me that everything is going to be okay.
gotta go with my dog He is the truth! A real straight up cat!
thanks guys!
tank you very much Byron Scott
Pierogis??? In Baltimore???? OMG do they have golabki, too?????? And where is it?
lets do it
RT : I remember my elementary school library being so big. Like it was an adventure looking through all the aisles.
Thx for the follow. I will check out your books. Sounds like man fantasy.
Good things come tew thoes who wait thatS exactly y i wait goodniqht and
Epic night with epic people!!!
I will let management know, thank you
u look like u bored
Its here! The Galaxy S 2....Come check it out
We're proud to be Milwaukee's Number 1 nightlife source!
Huntsman talking about simplifying tax code sounds a lot like 's Path to Prosperity. I could get behind that.
follow her
Looking forward to the wknd:) gonna be
The boy and I just started reading it (on our Kindles, too)!
Just left school
Yes it is totally packed! Why don't you join us tonight?
Would like to see this hawks team at 100% from the jump. Horford adds alot
Omg! That is so funny! Made me spit up my Pepsi.
Good Morning! A little girl seeks revenge. A real woman moves on while karma does her dirty work.
and btw all those other replies were bullshit too. Their lives suck too they just aren't admitting it.
Excuse me on that last tweet, i meant malice at Chesapeake Energy Arena.
Enjoy coffee deals with the California Express VIP Card, call now to join 619.226.1121
thanks Sasha, great to see you, too. I love your work man, you're one of the best.
Seriously my fave Halloween movie is Hocus Pocus...for years now. (that's about as scary as I go lol)
Stop breaking hearts lol RT Boys hate rejection... *chuckle*
GASO Championship Monday!
yea, more emails gotta love the communication between founders
Thanks buddy! Hope you are doing well!
follow me plzz
Stirsman could you kindly point out to this gentleman what sunglasses he is wearing in his profile picture?
HAPPY NEW YEAR AUSTIN!! <3 <:D
Crazy San Diego traffic law: It is illegal to shoot jackrabbits from the back of a streetcar.
this is beyond a "walk taken," this is an summer olympic RUN across the field taken
wait im kinda confused.... is ALL of mb gonna be in the movie or JUST 1 of them.
How can one not like Wong's Wok yet they like the China Buffett heat lamped food?..yikes..
have fun-good luck- stay safe!! We'll miss you!
Bucks might be out of the playoffs with that loss... come on guys the wizards?
do you have an example? Would like to review the blog in question..
love him.
First half of the night - Quad Squad 167, Reservoir Dolls 120
Wright State transfer Julius Mays told Rivals earlier today that he does have an offer from Kentucky.
shitss getting real!!
I miss my best friends
So pumped for BC!!!
Going to see the Avengers with the Marines crew! I'm the only non marine, woo!!
Will was so ready to commit. #GoodWife darn it Alicia... Its complicated. I know.
1st problem...ghosting. PC and waiting - 2nd problem server down and waiting for reboot. Waiting is all I can do.
I hope doesn't get mad that I'm still awake. :( But I just wanted to say that I love love him. I love him more than anything
Thanks Forrest. It was a blast and they're a great group. Anytime my friend!
Today is the anniversary of the birth of I think we can all agree this was a momentous occasion in all our lives Happy Anniversary
Tap List cont... Devotion Blond Ale, Red Chair NW Pale Ale
Listening to #TheWindow . Narrow Minded Critics I can really relate too...good shitt.
Guess I found my answer. Too bad the episode leaked online :D
Doing well. I'm a procrastinator so I stay busy. All well in your parts?
Agreed. Really suprised there was not more.
Great Bella Thorne came online and my timeline is flooded with spams sent to her -.- <3
Merry Christmas!
How do I reach the stars, when I don't have a spaceship?
oh. sad face... keep me posted.
Hey , has been sending you Enrique music videos too?
when do we get fsc/fox soccer plus and gol tv in hd in kansas city?
~The Illusionist w/ Ed Norton
Hello guys! :* Tweet us! how was your day?
It could have ended worse, actually. It could have been the Penguins. Thanks for a good season,
Not a surprise, that's why I don't criticize the reffs in any of my columns. RT : Roger Goodell. Crazy, huh?
#celtics vs #76ers game was like a good undercard match on fight night: entertaining, but lets get to the main event
Cars holding up your commute? Welcome to LA traffic !
can u help me i need followers
hit my cell nigga
Give me the chance to love you. I'll tell you the only reason why, 'cause you are #OnMyMind!(: i love you!
love you too girl!
My AP class starts the definition unit. I will define free speech-- that disappearing American asset essential to democracy.
Thanks so much for the fantastic write up! We're thrilled that the trunk show at was a success :)
word no clue what that means but that's what's up
Having fun with a co-worker's Southern pronunciation of "Winnebago." Sounds like "rutabaga."
Saturday afternoons are great self maintenance time! Massages reduce the heart rate and lower blood pressure. Take time for yourself!
on conferences/committees: these incur incredible expense, involve too much talking, and way too much tension...
You're #MyWish . Follow me, never change! I love u so much! You're incredible, I want cry when i hear your songs kisses 1. *-*
how did you find him?!
Jennifer Lopez telling Phillip Phillips he made that song his own makes me want to show her a Dave Matthews video.
lol kay.. you havent changed yet :p just.. you're getting cute :3 no joke
That's the plan. I could use the break.
So jealous. A favorite of mine for sure.
#facebook.com/JOJOPLANSONEATINGHEALTHIER9528#join me
We just got #lucky; #StopSopa #Early-hiliday-gift?
In Georgia
Ha! true - i always qualify my minor complaints re Indy by admitting that there are many, many, MANY worse places to live
Got big plans for my mom tomorrow on Mothers Day.
hope you had fun. We're weird.
Special thanks to Will Watson and the team at you all have helped tremendously and always do a FABULOUS job!
Will it be a San Fran blowout today? They are looking dominant!
In which I shamelessly (and somewhat incorrectly) use the term "human obsolescence" go.usa.gov/nn3
Sometimes, the outlook rules I set outsmart me
ok good! Never like to hear about someone going to a hospital at this time of night, never a good thing! :(
yeah your tweets are boring haha jk but yeah I got a waterproof iPhone case now so I gotta tweet about it haha
It is true I swim in a perpetual sea of #sex but the actual excursions are fairly limited
Why are stripclubs so pretty lol.
So birds, bees, and now tree frogs... never a dull moment :)))
what scripture would help me through temptation??
good night what time is it over there
Not including earned interest, of course.
I found THE perfect poem for Vivian!
Hello new followers! Hopeful you will engage w/ this project. Share, comment, write. Add to #180voices180stories. Yours is a story to tell!
I thought the only sure things this year were paulino/Chen. I thought paulino was very good last yr.I only worried bout health
we'll check it out! peace
Oh my god, I want to get (another) masters in Food Anthropology. For real.
This stupid tv show of god is getting on ma nuts~
WHAT A KNOCKOUT
Damn!! It's like that..people really be killing me man I swear
sounds perfect, I must check it out.
Happy St Paddy's!
Next thing i wanna say is Seabass needs to pull his head out is ass and remember why he is the highest paid kicker in the league.
Does anyone know what's better between Botox and collagen? Groupon has a thing for collagen for $150 and Botox is about the same.
We're thrilled to announce that we are ready to host events in Miami Circle! The beautiful park in Brickell, rich with historical backgroud
How about those GMEN!? What a game!
South Carlina has not addressed whether epidemiological studies require a RR > 2.0 to be sufficient evidence.
Today's Inspirational Quote: "Every day may not be good, but there's something good in every day." -- Author Unknown
dude, the more beer pints, the less brain cells : p
Ryan O'Neal recalls love story with Farrah in 'Both of Us' - USA TODAY
Our tax dollars paid for the Secret Service agents to do what?!?! Tax Day is bad timing for the air waves to be discussing that! So sad...
Shout out for the team behind -- Omaha is my hometown and amazing work by
Q & A time or voice your opinion about a health issue!!
only you would Tyler haha
I hope this rash isn't contagious...
#emailsci Early morning emails have higher success rates. My clients rock and have right already!
visit us on facebook: KEFPRODUCTIONS
or perhaps you need get yourself back down to DC on the weekends.
I AM drinking ****** merlot! (And we have a great selection.)
RT : A. Lee Martinez () offers up some advice on writing and the importance of voice in a new video blog...
I was there too! It was a great show
That's what I was thinking. Appreciate the help. Still tangled up in work as far as you know for the season opener?
I personally would LOVE to have my dog at work with me!
NYC Joe Allen's theater vibe, eggs for dinner and meatloaf followed by The View @ top of MMarquis must-do.
Happy #Halloween everyone! What are your Halloween plans?
I just brushed my dog's teeth and filed his nails. Obviously, shit is getting crazy over here.
Chicago day trip with the fam...
another interview. you know how hustlin' is.
: Hm. I learn something new every few minutes.
Chocolate Strawberries Recipes If roses are the quintessential Valentine's Day gift for lovers, chocolate strawberries are the quintessen
Mind following back? :)
really? what was the startup?
The needed to win for sure.
What do they say about the bird who stays at work late and gets to work early?
Only we can dictate when the narration of our story will cease.
Be curious always! For knowledge will not acquire you; you must acquire it
I appreciate it, Bridget :) RT hahaha really Bridget...lol
I know...come on now!!!
I consume most through legal streaming sites, but I do still watch [as] on Saturday nights.
There are so many cunts on this bus.
RT : #Hair Tip: Once done blow #drying, flip your #hair upside-down & blast it with cool setting to set style & add
Quite right. It's unwatchable dreck.
got it on my shelf here if you need it.
Chocolate covered espresso beans
It's a far cry from the original, let's just say that. But you're not paying for it, so it's not all bad
looking for yoga instructor interested in teaching challenge Sun Oct 2nd from 4-6. if interested
Hashtag us! #RiDe or
doing good. KMT emailed back and he is down too.. Just gotta get us all together for a few hours and make great things happen..!!
come to london asdfghjk
RT : "And we populate this stereoscope scene with a tribe of monkeys..." I LOVE MY JOB
Ah… Saturday. Come out to Brady Street tonight!
my head is still hurting though, so we will have to see how long this lasts- hopefully not long
Rush to the club cuz I wana get faded.
"yeah its heads get over here!"
I am. It makes me feel very hopeful!
I just hired a production company for my project. There's no turning back now :-)
LOOL I should! >:)
I'm hungry ._.
No, you're not the only woman that hates clothes shopping. I feel your pain...
": I am just messing wit you big bro I know"////I KNO LMAO
Everything in moderation. At least you stopped at five.
Followed back :) Sorry it took so long.
it didnt work :(
Midnight in Paris...ah, Paris...I'm in #love with u again. Woody...u killed it.
Pete Wentz is at The Rock tonight. Hmm maybe I'll go after the show and have him autograph my Fall Out Boy stuff.
Hello y'all
Most go looking for a woman they can live with try looking for one you can't live without!
The Penderwicks at Point Mouette by Jeanne Birdsall and Should I Share My Ice Cream? Great day of reading!
Hoped you packed your rainwear see you in Austin.
J &B's Tavern This Sat. CD Release Party come out and have some fun......with Specyphi.... New Laser Light show....
RT : Just got done talking with Mark from Wines That Rock, seriously think they need to do a Clash wine.
Bought a Kindle today. It's obviously a brave new world in which I live. Figured that I might as well start tweeting as well.
An old customer calls looking to start service back up. I'm Able and Ready to accomodate
I'm obsessed with say yes to the dress/weddings... #whencanihaveone ?
Thursday is my favorite day so far this week! Friday better come prepared because Thursday will be tough to beat!
Was at the pool with my sis and the security gaurd comes so we take of hahaha so fun
My truck gave out on me this morning. :(
CATS. CATS. CATS. AND MORE CATS.
crying i am in so much pain
#prproblems RT : Booking flights, drafting press releases, sending emails. Typical
It was pretty great!
The male Yak says GOAL! Goodstuff Rovers
The free reusable bag from today? Just the right size to be pretty much useless . Nice concept, less than ideal execution.
- In Psychology class
Anyone know how to cite a tweet in ASA style?
True. Hm I Wonder Who I Can Ask To Find Out...?
how do I win the signed guitar!!
nice!!! Which song is your fave??
Omg my bday is coming up so excited!! :) but today my friends bf broke up with her bc of me now I feel really bad!! :(
I'm a unicorn!
if those few i had found there way to a thrift store in Vermont,i`m pretty sure that a whole catalog exists somewhere.
Girl your phsycotic calm yourself. & don't mess with my bestfriend
Hell yeah! RT : Highly curated relevant content is the most important key for future journalism and media business.
New album is slawesome! Can't wait for my vinyl to arrive. Favorite song, "Money Saves"
Fuck with my ENOTIONS && see what will happen
Bout to get my work out on...leaving my phone at home!
business law is so boring
follow me back please.1
I feel like a black guy at a country music concert.
Awoke w/ stress attack at 5 AM --> retrieved the paper in time to see the stars and planets in all their predawn glory. Perspective moment.
Send us an email to and we'll send you an autographed picture and "Pixel Love" CD while supplies last. Cheers!
rad! send me a link for the new band too kiddo!
I had so many potential Sams... and now it seems the only one I will end up with is the one that requires a membership card
If you can cut over the sink and run the knife under cold water, sometimes that helps. ...sniff...now you got ME crying!
Praying for peace and the change I'd like to see in the world today.
Most Ppl can never accept your downfalls but if they can love u "wen it doesnt hurt" than they should be able to do all the same wen it does
and in other life maybe
Point of Sale is the key component in making your restaurant run efficiently. Manage everything from timeclock to reporting with our app!
Yeah, I've been very stress lately. How are things going?
Thanks for the follow!
My 5YO: Dad, I know I used to be all into ATV's and stuff but I'm over that. Now I'm all about Jet Packs!
He who spares the wicked injures the good.
#ThatAwkwardMomentWhen the work you are trying to draw on #DrawSomething is "momjeans"
315,716 properties last month filed foreclosure:RealtyTrac. These filings include default, auctions and bank repos. Up 15% Annually.
#neurodigitour Newport News, Virginia
Campus recess on the field! Go check it out =]
thanks, thats a great help
I want to see my bro tonight!
Spurs taking it
I saw Once, the musical, this week. Loved it!
RT : "The time you enjoy wasting is not wasted time." -- Bertrand Russell
American idol was pretty shocking tonightt!!
Thanks for the #FollowFriday mention
outlet at sdsu is a joke. Why say it's a ticketmaster outlet if u only sell tickets for events in San Diego? Really?
BanQuetpress, Australia’s only dedicated publisher of LGBTIQ-themed writing and art, is looking for submissions for its 2013 editions. Ba
meanwhile in NC....
Excited to get to play at work today instead of bug fix (and by play, this nerd means product dev and innovation)
Good times at The TriBeCa Grand tonight! I could get used to this - watching my face on the big screen w/ hottie as my date.
is more than a singer, performer, song writer, fashionista, & chart topping musician. She's an inspiration to millions.
I'm totally tired, I finished homework at 9:00 pm a Hey Paoo or whatever would make me go to sleep!:]♡17
$1 for every ticket that is sold will be donated to in support to ending breast cancer & causing awareness. Now that's #SWAG!
The day finally happened, I'm awake before my morning burst of emails arrives.
MT : On 4/2/90 Nirvana & Butch Vig went to Smart Studios in Madison to record demos of several songs that ended up on Nevermind
Sick as shit...gotta try and sleep...
Oh boy, nothing says childhood memories quite like tipsy mom on Mothers Day hehe
: going to BBQ
So... did you get a ticket?
Thanks! RT : This cup's for you!
"I'm in a cynical mood this morning."
At the Zac Brown show at Phillips Arena. about to sing with
How bromance happy are u guys Petey already got a call up? Lololo Love u crazy fukcs!
with what may we help?
pretty much
Good morning! I want a doughnut. Talk me out of it!!
Note to self...house parties bigger than 5 ppl suck. Not gonna do that again!
How did Heavy D die?
Guys if I don't follow back right away, I will soon. I ain't a robot I was sleeping! Haha
I used to have a cat, she was a slut.
Bring 1D to Omaha Ne I really really do wanna see
well said #payforte and BEARDOWN .. watch out everyone
Number 2?!! LA we need to clean it up a bit!
You got that right.
: Thank you for sharing your Dad & the blessings of memories w all of us.
Not just replacing coffee with green tea - conciously pumping it through myself at least 12 hrs/day. Formaldehyde for the living.
She got a deepvoice i mistakened her for Freeway lol
We have Direct Connect with Bank's REOs for Pennies on Dollars for Commercial and Residential Properties - Email:
yep me too man. Still one of the worst feelings I've ever had after that regional game.
Does Brain Training Improve Cognitive Abilities?
's got something different tho.
Merry Christmas a couple days late lol been running my behind off!
Thanks for following back! :)
Thanks for the FF, Liv!
& JR unpacking the tension btwn the public and private voice...& losing one's "platform" + validation.
Boyd and Jeff are working the lights during a night interview.
As of tonight, Newt is toast.
just got that good ol Job at guitar center!!! Bless his holy name!
People tell me we look alike. The Roger Dietch. Have drug detection foundation that needs some attention from you.
lmao black people stupid how you gone talk all that shit and then when niggas wanna fight you not fighting!!! ah!!! gtfo my face!!!
preciate that, babe. :)
um....Yeah! !!!! My zombie library wouldn't be complete without it!!!
I'm starving this morning! Why oh why?
The original is longer. Moves slower, less polished. More character development, and unfolding of the complex plot.
S.T.U.D.Y = Singing, Tweeting, Unlimited Texting, Dreaming, Yawning.
My little cousin is running around singing, "No shoes, no shirt, and I still get service!" Lmfao. Wow..
why can't i read my DM's or see my mentions:-( And I lost another friend today, SMDH!
I can't even handle this!!!!
more than 20 hours on the way from Moscow to TX...while the rest of the world enjoyed the w/end. :)
No sir, inserting a usb in your laptop doesn't enable you to print. You must use a public computer to print.
chillin with my sister brittney who wanna chill with her hit her up if u wanna chill with her
SAVE THE DATE: #YearofBoulevard Community Cleanup Sat May 19, 9a-12p. Meet up: Fort Street UMC parking lot 562 Boulevard NE 30308.
Get over the hump at One Up Elevated Lounge. Join us for lunch, happy hour and beyond. Chef inspired menu items and endless ambiance.
Hold on...I'm coming!
i <3 when bands i love are excited to see other bands i love RT : at Webster Hall tonight!
ron artest laying duded out again, a little world peace to my man james dome...
BPA testing methods to add load during wind over-generation events. DR goes both ways.
it's way too weird to think there are so many moronic non thinking folks in this country.
JUST SENT YOU AN EMAIL! CHECK IT OUT!!
The traffic in LA never ceases to amaze me.
My mom said she can't wait for #TurnToYou haha she loves you. It's gonna be amazing! ❤❤
Welcome Rob, Andrea, DeAnne, Elisabeth, and Marco!
RT If all God wanted to do was get to the happy ending, you'd be in heaven by now. The process is the point!
No excuses now!
Hilarious interview of on tonight.
that should work. We can catch dinner/coffee on the evening of the 4th or lunch on the 5th. Some great places in center city!
Chipotle > Wing Stop
Because I totally passed that test in english 
Platinum Post News... Jacob Lusk Sent Home On 'American Idol'
Sounds like someone has a crush. ;)
Appreciating a storm is the best trick of all.
Fuck no that butcher ass girl
Hey I am sorry it took me so long! Will be directing something in the spring!
This resteraunt is strange.
Try it after a 6-pack? “: Ever walk up a hill backwards? Crazy feeling of falling without falling. Try it.”
RT : tonight was fun.
probably not till producers stop picking the camera ;-)
I've seriously been looking like a monster all week.
And we are out of there good bye Iraq!
Come by and visit us at the Franchise and Business Opportunities Expo in Charlotte, NC January 29th &30th. Booth number 202 ! For free ad…
Thanks for the follow back!
Like the idea that students should have a hand in professional development curriculum for their teachers.
I love you
These allergies are kickin my as ugh omg >_<....
Next event - you should call #TopFamEnt we can get the word out for ya! Promo specials... 410.513.9199 - ask for Ty
Some one just told me there was rules to this shit ! It's a little late for that hook up !
oh. Did she bring any omiyage?
Just published an article about what factors to consider when deciding whether to update or totally remodel your kitchen.
think they will return by Wednesday or might we have to create a new environment?
...is what I was trying to say, yes. Only not very clearly.
That's awesome! A good thing for sure. =)
I don't know beautiful ... what's your name?
I'm a grammar nut. Except Twitter makes me slip sometimes...as does autocorrect. The road to hell is paved with Tweets.
You can't be suprised about the dislike considering the effort you expend irritating and agitating people
His brother derrick, 1 of my best friends. know landon well. U were brot up, i'm like, that cat's followin us on twitter :)
It is the herd mentality in action.
Thanks for your interest! Send clean edits to .edu
Ticket on sale for our next Encore show - April 26 at - Yo-Yo Ma and Kathryn Stott with Assad Brothers. Will you be joining?
I don't like being alone, just makes me thing about negative things
ok, thanks for the info. I might buy like just one then.
Grit and determination made that Seguin goal. Comparable to a hard fought offensive rebound in traffic.
#Facebook Inc kicked off #IPO roadshow in New York, attracting hundreds of investors who formed a snaking line around the block.
Someone guessed that I am French today.
What if somebody banned YOUR marriage, straights? You wouldn't like that, would you?
Ha! Milk, whole.
same here
It's perverse but I miss dark and raw New England springs. Meanwhile, the roses here in Texas are bursting!
I love pickles :)
we would love to soon! Need record some new music before we travel that far. We'll make it happen!
playing Christian Grey makes the #50ShadesOfGrey fantasy inside my head so much hotter
I was really ready for this week off... Somehow I'm just getting in bed after baking for the last 8 hours. 
Werewolf Slayer APA beginning to brew and 3 stations ready to bottle, when will you start your own batch? Call today!
I don't want the world to see me Bc I don't think that they'd understand When everything's made to be broken I just want u to know who I am
Yes! You too? I thought I was the only one. lol
what about him? That's my guy <33333 he's safe.
Nice job brother! I hope all is well with you!
Whats life like not being with someone who doesn't #inspire u 2 be a better u & give u butterflies? #idontwannaknow.... Lol
Now I won't be able to put my phone in my uggs anymore. That sucks.
Tampa. Maybe NYJ. PHI has some crazy weaknesses no one talks about plus some new parts.
{People who pursue excellence also prepare for total failure.}
aww sad :/ they'll come back. They're missing an awesome player.. can't blame em lol
whats a good conversion rate for a consumer internet site like yogatailor.com?
next time your in my area we'll take a stroll man
are you hyped for Teen Wolf season 2?
Just sitting here wondering who would win in a fight? Chewbacca, or Bigfoot? No crossbows allowed.
When your bestfriend talks about leaving.. <<<<
"It's funny how people choose their life decisions."
the rainbow!!!
True true
yep, he's done.
Meet Jerry before I die <3
I couldn't get into the link you sent me. So I guess all's well. Love your work!!
Text me his number.. I miss y'all niggas blood...
I Would Have Dropped Him Over
Had such a great time at Walter Reed Army Medical Center! Enjoyed handing out shoes to our service men and women!!!
I want to met Criss Angel!!!
Happy Mother's day to all moms - probably the toughest job there is!
cool that's what's up what u do promote?
I love your tumblr!
A man's character may be learned from the adjectives which he habitually uses in conversation. - Mark Twain
Nvm..eating somewhere else. Too full..ugh starving!
I am grateful for Allen Ginsberg who fought censorship and taught me that you can really say it all. He opened my voice.
Anybody ever tried Arbonne? Just got some samples :)
Great, gotta go to the doctors tomorrow to see how my ribs are. # :/
I'm craving chocolate strawberries!
is so dissapointed his real self dustin hanna wasn't cast as a fujifilm greeter for tomorrow
hmm even though my library won't? I'm pretty sure we don't send our AV stuff out and about. >.<
Woop! Thank you!
already on fire!
:O YOU NEVER HAD SUBWAY!? get his girl subway asap! ;) <3 Haha
Without a workable ipod in my truck, I am thankful everyday for And I could write a dissertation on Springer Mtn. Farms chicken.
Since Brendon is rocking the Bruce Lee hairstyle we will be watching Enter the Dragon tonight
I wish I knew, tell me when you find out!
May Chuck's legacy never be forgotten by DC residents and musicians
Many of luxury resi buyers who are now adding 3rd and 4th homes are looking for a place to park their money, rather than leave it in cash
Looking at different soup recipes ...m, yes =]
woohoo! Gotta love disappearing stains...
FUCK NO THAT WAS A BULLSHIT ASS CALL R U KIDDING ME
if you love Mahomies you have to follow !
nothing just glad the crappy day is over sup with you?
I've been wanting to try this place! You give it a thumbs up?
& Captain Kirk as best ever: particularly when he wore eyeliner.
#patriotgala Great evening with War Heros and Friends
But can you see Uranus?
M Omaha steak from the grill with a Motion W branded on it. What a way to prepare for the start of the season! Go Badgers!
My Friends & I are dancing & singing to "Valerie" -Amy Winehouse! I love Amy! xoxo
Funny how it turns out sometimes.
I don't wanna be that girl.
Treat the people you love, the way you want to be treated
Wow. The Colts are cutting Peyton Manning! Wonder who he'll play for now??
me too:( warped?
Am I the only person who never takes a day off for a cold? Unless there is a high fever w/sweats, I am going to get paid/infect others.
If you keep on doing what you always do you'll keep on getting what you've always got!
Could it get any bumpier
if youre thinking about what i think you are. GIRL im feeling the same way
RT Senate Ed votes 2-1 against repeal of the La Science Education Act, which critics say allows creationism in schools.
Love hearing this. Yes, Mr. Putter and Tabby are lovely for grown-ups too. Love that good dog, Zeke!
can u plzzzzzzzzzzzzzz shut the fuck........... up
using a purple lightsaber should get your #Mancardrevoked but can definitely pull that shit off.
On my way to the gym now to work off yesterday's stress and bull
I'm sure your readers will love :)
i think that the most coolest peoples in the wrold is , , , so follow them please :)
haha yeah I know! That would be amazing. :)
Damn, the first scene! Our ad was spot on.
That math test was epic ahaa!
#idontsupport you talking so much. #isupport you shutting your mouth for once!
for sure dude! what kind of music do you guys play?
can I ask you a question about when you first started out as a band? I really like you guys and you're unique.
Go Boston!
Must turn in passport app!!!
I have the sudden urge to watch Capt. Bucky O'Hare...
- so my beautiful fiance took a little cat nap, we'll see you at 6:30
Do you sell telecoms solutions?... Would you like to increase your profits?..DM or call 0844 880 2010 for details :)
a teacher.
Thanks for the #FF :) Everyone follow!
Well worlds was a joke.
Jaguar&#39;s Got Something Cooking For The Upcoming F-Type Roadster
atleast yours work and mine never had it -.-
is being mean
Wait Nicolette tweeted me...
Can it get worse? It can get a whole lot worse. If we blow it and elect Mitt Romney, we'll see just how bad it can really get.
hope there are more ups than downs Things are good for me heading to hawaii next month two finally finish shooting my project
are you going to church?
Does anyone know when is back in session?
for sure!!! I agree w/ you on that one
My first bus ride on NFTA went well!
Today is Wednesday...don't let the calendars fool you!
Christmas sweater tomorrow
Hoot-hoot! Have fun in CA. Still in San Diego?
so hot mamacita
I wish it came with a poster, its like the one poster I actually want
You are wonderful! Can't wait to see you.
Comic Sans is a horrible font. (It's up there with Scriptina.) Why do people use it to send "professional" emails? *cringes*
I Love When In No Idea Carlos Says When I Kiss You & When I Please You (: hehe <3
ss you know what happened. we got a referrel and a 1 hour. FML. i told him that we mixxed up shirts ....
RT Becoming a groupie “: Urging employees 2 "think outside box" If you trusted them, wouldn't be in box in 1st place”
"the credits for im gunna get you sucka list you as rib joint customer"
These are the REAL #MadMen.....Watch #ThePItch on #AMC and see how it's done!
M... Like a little under a month
you thought that was good? too bad you didn't know .... haha
words cannot describe how much i fucking love your voice. oh my. you're perfect for Get Scared! :)
boi you need a new fitted in your avi
A view from
#ThingsKidsSay "Why Did You Spank Me?" All The While Knowing Exactly Why... Lol
"I gotta stop bein so awesome!" :D
Ellie Goulding's music is perfection.
they want to add there 2 sense with it lol
touche. welcome to the Internet.
Madison's winky faces & hearts >>>>
can't wait! RT : yay looking forward to dinner with two of my favorite people tonight
Had a wonderful time seeing old friends & making new ones at
Life is a song... Love is the music.
great show last night at the Mutiny, specail love to for turning in a fantastic performance
If you were going to a wedding reception at the Memorial Union in Madison and needed a hotel, where would you stay?
does everybody love sunshine
S/o 2 the "rappers"/ "hoodstars" that cant keep track of their house keys
any colorists want to come play? dm us!
so where we getting crazy you in Belltown?
There's nothing better than a holiday romance
Producer of Forrest Gump and an Oscar and co-owner of the Giants and a Championship Good on Steve Tisch
“: Popping corn. The corn that pops.” biggest faggot award
you are welcome!!
Let's go #nyrangers!!!!!
I remember this guy! Great product but a bit confusing with his vision.
Oh, good one Rich. I'm adding that to my list!
Low-Cholesterol Recipes: Suzy's Green Tomato Relish 3.83 / 5 Stars | 5 Reviews by OneKeeneKat "That patch of green tomatoes can yield a d
Makes me wonder how they'd describe NMNH from your SM having never been to it physically.
CHALLENGE!! Can you beat Gian Perrone and become Fan of the Week? Check your score above! I dare you to beat him! ;)
Learning how to use WikiEducator. i already had an account and i hope i can use it with the Zambian Bloggers Network
Good morning to you!
Follow my partner
Giving FontExplorer X Pro a try and liking it so far.
I am not a second class citizen.
#ImThatPersonWho embraces ORIGINALITY AND BEING YOURSELF BECAUSE IMITATION IS WORST THEN MURDER
wondering how i am going to walk to walk to the metro in 4 in heels
Was especially cool to see her wife and family's support. Super rad.
yep, love that guy.
That's right waffle buddies, the same house-made salted caramel goes right from our Stumptown lattes into your blood stream.
got hit on by a dude at the Lez Zeppelin concert tonight
About to watch on the #Letterman 30 year anniversary show!
anyone bowling good? Making money?
you should show more of ur face then yes
me too.
Lmaoooo ready when you are
#NDSA UK web archive is open access and includes 10k websites at the end of June 2011
oh c'monnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnn we know you do it .
Uh oh, some staff here are going to face the students in a dodgeball tournament next Saturday. I'm sure they're looking forward to it.
digging the site!
how is my puppy doing ?
What a beautiful day in the mile high city! Are you medicated?? We have what you need. stop in and see us! :)
Thank you all for your sharing great, inspirational messages
Is your nose feeling better? And so you're not mad at Millie anymore, I apologize for her... :p
#ItsOkayToCheatif you're dating a 7- and the side girl is atleast 3 points higher. For example, you can cheat on a 5 with an 8.
but from recent research I CAN tell you that online poker players make more $ than pro soccer players. ;)
PEARL BAILEY...BY REQUEST -- PAY-WHAT-YOU-CAN PREVIEW Thursday, November 19, 2009 8:00pm $10 minimum expected, more gratefully accepted
I agree!
life can be a bitch.
bwaha! Don't be alarmed.
Guess I'll just stay on my own shit too..
last tweet is the perfect example of what I think about when I am not thinking about anything for too long
Thanks you rock!
I had to check the box score to make sure I wasn't losing my mind. Heh.
What am I going to wear to this funeral tomorrow? 😥
If you have dust mite allergies, encasings for the mattress and pillows are an absolute must according to most allergists....
Wadt kind of sister im ii yes ndd deed
There is next season and TIMMY will be better!!!
My mom was the master of that!
Being pregnant and working in a theme park is tough...I want a hot dog, nachos and a funnel cake so bad right now.
I think I'll go to bed for a while, after all its Sunday! hahahahaa
RT Emery says McClellin is a defensive end in Bears defense
did you like the edukators?
I really really hate being bored...so im just gonna draw.:p
Excellent point. Right on! Take what you learn and give it a try. Jim Rohn said do not let the record show that you did not
I love getting compliments from strangers after fashion shows :)
To those has tags on instagram really work. I just put a hash tag of justinbieber and MADD ppl liking that shit! Lmaoo
just sent it to him! Haha
love the dress! FIRE! You make me want to get my summer clothes out! DIVA STATUS!
I already know who "won" but I have to watch the #Bachelor finale for myself. Train wreck...and I'm not just talking about Ben's hair.
Baby-boomers NEVER run out of wine. LOL.
hahah i was just listenin to hellcat spangled shalalala and now its still ill by the smiths
thanks for checking out the etsy thread about the #kindness event (: Hope to see ya around then!
THIS SUNDAY: Butterscotch baby will be vending @ Art in the Gardens located at Boerner Botanical Gardens 9400 Boerner Drive Hales Corner, WI
you are preaching to the choir my friend.. ImA get you a quality pair of earplugs
NOW FOLLOWING
and back at ya
mother efffer why are we so broke. well we only need $20 between the 3 of us.. we can just bump dollars off randoms
miss another day n ima cry bro swear.
Having a bad attitude will not get you the position you want to play.
Thanks for the follow, Janaya.
But sadly I knew I should have been quicker
Bob Marley 4/20 I wish I still celebrated
Fireballs may need to be the new jack honey!
I DIDN'T MEAN TO HURT YOU, I'M SO SORRY. DO YOU REALLY WANT ME TO LET GO OF HIM? I MISS YOU SO MUCH. PLEASE COMEBACK. :(
Today, buyers start their purchasing process on the Internet, in the search engines, blogs, and social media
Asians<3 That's me (;
Caracas (pop. about 4.5 million) has close to 100 homicides every week end.
I love twitter, I love Justin, I love Selena, I love all Justin's fans. I love my life, as long as Justin Bieber is alive! ♥ Please follow
Oh my captain, my captain. Thy will be done. Ơ̴̴͡.̮Ơ̴̴̴͡
WAKE UP!
Guys, girls only say there's nothing wrong to hide the ugly truth
Sometimes yelling. RT There's a point in a spreadsheet day where you realize you are addressing excel by name as well as out loud.
not a joke, i'm just kinda giving up and unless something magical happens in like two hours im deleting it.
Why did call me last might?
Pentax is still a company?
Day TWO of Joe's ride to raise funds from Creative Arts Camp! Thanks, Joe!
Against my better advice, you've gone and elected me to the ALCTS CMS Executive Committee. Or that's what my email says.
hey... This girl does
School will bore u if u have 2 much work
On #MothersDay pause to say a prayer for all those who would be #mothers but for the horror of
He done the heart x
Thanks for stopping by the office today. Always good to talk with you
probably not
I am Kanye East.
does anyone know that iTunes/iMatch/iCloud is changing playlists and removing the digital books? I am missing over 1700 files
Thanks for the follow! Hope this means you support electing a mayor!
They can't handle you for being you. ;) LOL.
Project x was def a crazy movie.
“: You know you're really in love when you smile at every message he sends you.”
A fond farewell to a friend,Joe Sell,one of the most naturally talented musicians I've ever met passed away.You'll always be missed.
Glad to hear.
I just read the best thing :D
escape! time for dinner, pie making, and dancing!
“Laugh as much as you breathe and love as long as you live.”
Our pets heads are falling off!
I'm up guess ill pray, that's the best time 2 pray early n the morning :)
dancersaurous.... is a dancing dinosaur..therfore I too, am a dancersaurous
You really know how to put a smile on someone's face.
I'm leaning toward Dinocalypse Now by or Throne of the Crescent Moon.
im following can you please give me a shoutout ? <3
True thats why u gotta make em lov u when u perform so they will wanna buy ur music, they will feel as tho u deserve it
Congrats to CJ McCollum and Lehigh. I bet big brother Eric is proud (playing pro ball in Israel and formerly Goshen College in IN)
Relationships contains ship for a reason because although you may think your relationship is strong. It still can have the tendency to sink.
When u like them n they dont like u recipe for disaster
Sang and played a little. Felt good. Maybe next time I'll consider the neighbors.
Thanks! We have our winners! I'll msg you soon! :)
Lmmfao dumb girlfriend on maury I love when the b.m right and leave the g.f lookin stupid!.
It's some funny #FamuFb lmao!!!
I'd like to donate a cantillon grand cru to the sour tasting. Interested?
how do I find you on it? Downloaded it when I got your email.
So well-played. Just really nicely done.
Thank you so much for the feature today! (p.s. 3.5 weeks left!) (til we meet) (in case it wasn't clear) (sorry)
those e-trade baby commercials just keep getting better n' better. milka-what ?
Nice bike ride to top off the day. It's amazing what some time away from technology can do for a person :)
Thanks Carly for making our bad-ass caps possible. We owe you a cold one
I love my Mac & my iPhone! Thx Steve for making it happen! What gadgets do you like? Your auto, blender, camera, & PSP? Shoot 'em for fun!
Thats really cool! Thanks for your support for Austin! I know it means the World to him! :)
#Np Cashin Out!! That's that song though!!! :D
I don't much like superficial interactions either. I think I'm getting better at avoiding 'em but maybe I'm flattering myself :)
stop with the adorable sleepy eyes in class --driving , , and into fits of laughter.
Know your telecomm trivia for tonight's Tavern Trivia!! 7:30 at Uptown, Lowry, Tech, Wash Park and Littleton.
Lobster & Pearl Diver are 2 of our teachers' favorite apps too- they've evaluated all math & reading apps for elem
The #DFL sucks. #Minnesota needs the #Vikings. Remember how long it took Pro #hockey to return? It cost a new #stadium anyway!
When my boyfriends sick i feel like dkdinedidnusndow$%4/jdkheusj ): my poor grumpy boy
If you can dance, you can love. And if you can love, you can do other shit
Saw that was having a Derby event and thought of you! Did you end up deciding to throw party or not this year?
I rly wish there were a couple days to take some deep breaths, say "Fuck! You!" to the sexists, and then jump on Barrett's bandwagon.
Is a kilt required? I am definitely in for some good Scottish food right now.
It was. That they might have a love/hate relationship w/ food. That sometimes they adjust better than we do.
looks interesting. Hope mtce costs don't make the biz prohibitive. And watch out for what did to
Italy, you?
dude does this chick only know red heads?! Damn.
Happy birthday to one of my best friends!
My phone going dead already
Let us know when you figure it out -- our resident blogger is at the ready!
opening day only 1 week away
such a dumb end! I loved the first one and now I'm pissed
never allow anyone to drag you so low as to make you hate, for hate destroys finally the hater.
meant hay but Ur welcome gay brother
shout out to , the cookout was really nice!
#SomeoneIWantToMeet and all the b/c they inspire me to do what I love and are my heros 😘
If You Ain't Got No Job...Download My New Song @ 2 PM
Intro to the Internet-Hatley Branch Library-Monday, February 6th 1:30-3:30p-learn the basics class taught by Mike Theiss UW extension
User:WertsHopp928 - Wiki
phew! Madbum got us back on track!
Starting off my morningg with some weezyyyy :).
why no serious talk about defense? we have to address the fact our defense budget is outrageous &it remains a sacred cow even for obama
had an orange and raspberries and blueberries as snacks today
Word! :) Can't wait to see the fruits of your labor! "Get your runway stride on!"
only non Asian haha
I made dinner(: this ishh on P O I N T !(:
Mobbin wit my baby momma today
grizz doing work? dang straight!
New Electrolux Frigidaire side-by-side refrigerator/freezer not ...
Who's Lorenzo?
Hahaha I love all of this
Is there a transcript or video for the Opening Plenary at #MW2011 ?
Looking for people who want to make money with their business!!
ABDC!! Finally starting in the west coast!
On my way to meet with Cosmopolitan and Good Housekeeping! Only 2 of the largest women's mags in the world. No big deal or anything.
Buy an Internet Radio Player by mulberry1
great just started using myh phone and its red already ..... #fuckyouphone ):/
#Resurrection "Peace Be With You"
Hanging out online on with and (follow hashtag #npdata) to learn about "Becoming a Data-Driven Organization."
Finally lunch time in this country place that i work .
DONT YOU FALL ASLEEP!!!! you got this
#IFindThatAttractive athletic men. Cause in athletic too and yes! i will watch sports with u. Lol just fuck golf BORING!
8 days until . Final long run complete.
yep ;) I just like my own quote ;) lmfao!!! ;D thank u 4 asking bro!!! Xoxoxo much <3
Wow I thought the last 20 hours of this campaign would have been me begging to make the goal. What an amazing surprise!
Thanks! Small hiatus but we are back. Lot's of more photos to come :)
Ecuador says it has a vineyard on the equator, while a Napa Valley vintner ... - Financial Times
the boys, no. the boyz, yes.
#travel G, are u tweeting this from the plane?
Miss my boo already. He's only been gone one day but still. Praying that he have a safe trip back to memphis tomorrow so that I can see him.
Enormous growth in blog use at PSU. Most of the blogs are public. says
morning still sleepy but skool well kinda miss my frandz from skool and goin to my hometown this week so might not be on-Tamya:P ily
great fun! How was the wx?
that is my new ringtone
“: Even tho you can't see us right now, you can still hear CBS 11 News at 5pm for our team coverage of the high winds”
I'm happy for Christoph Waltz but at the same time I'm disappointed...I was crossing my fingers for Michael Haneke with The White Ribbon
I cant fucking believe it , really? Need you know? Is that a joke? Annoyed...
At Wendy's.
Super Naughty Fun! #FF Happy Friday!
Docent’s were not delivering an iPad tour but rather judiciously using iPad to enhance a particular moment -
Thanks dude I am super stoked! And when I get back it is TIME TO GO OFF ME YOU STEVIE & AW YYYYEEEEEAAAAHHHH!!!!!!!
RT "Wonder if it's time to go with the Gomez/Morgan outfield from the start." That's what I was thinking.
i fixed it xD
Donors saw cash as imporsonal, disconnected, can't see results.
Did you know you may be able to deduct your health insurance costs in computing self-employment taxes?
ALL GOOD.
Why, yes, I would rather be asleep, thank you....
Omg..got robbed the other night got some of my stuff back thanks to my bro!
consider it done
sure you do lol
Live on set in our very own O'Hanlon's bar on 14th and 1st avenue Length: 1:12
i got totally new HONDA. oh and i also was paid $310 in one week... it was super simple owe it all to www•reportmoney•net for teaching me
RT : Don't miss out! The half-off Groupon deal for the Best of the City Party tickets ends today!
with my girls family! How was last night
The pessimist complains about the wind, the optimist expects it to change, and the realist adjusts the sails.
omg: those weren't worms I ran over, they were little curvy sticks. Millions of them, the same size.
I probably coulda kept that 2 myself...
i can't bretahe Justin please call my doctor I can't breathe!! (yea I watched #BoyfriendVideo are you an alien?)#followme :))
Mobile is all about doing more, all of the time
Pedicures: Paying forty bucks to get made fun of in a different language.
Great verse! one of my favorites.
These bitches who ain't have Facebook want twitter oh no y'all need to practice don't come on here talking dumb smh
So tired.
RT : will be at #1tday Union Sq 4pm! Can you say JUBILEE?! Bring your loan statement to destroy!
Every person who advocates for any "Stand Your Ground" law has a part in #Trayvon 's execution and needs to own up to it.
Lmao I can never win. But goin to bed. Love you & ! Night!!
What a lovely Thanksgiving!
Cold worth it for a rapids win...does this mean I care about soccer
Off too bed...g'nite tweeps!
I think I know who you are talking about! I see her on the 30 all the time!
Don't eat salami before hot yoga as it tends not be a spiritual experience for the person next to you
thanks man! haven't updated in a couple of days working on some new stuff!
didnt give me a hug todayy :(
We can open just about anything you can lock. Service calls start at $19.00
#WhenIWasLittle i called bananas "boo-nanas"
isn't Faith Evans a co-executor of the Biggie Estate being they never divorces? It may be the reason 4 the removal
GUYS. TALK TO ME!
Haha. They're both awful.
I will always be at the ready with a hammer and some serious rap music when the office equipment is naughty!
nothing we just chilled
Im walking on sunshine! :)
And is now awake
omg, that sucks! I just hope I pass! Goodluck to you!!
u saw my last tweet to u
love is real!
I think #thelostsymbol might literally drive me insane before I'm done. Character just "crossed the Anacostia River into Maryland."
wat part of GA u in
Want to get a jump on extending the life of your lightbulbs and saving energy? Look this
I don't how that your s year younger or in a different grade, your beautiful, in every way, I don't care what people say.
Good race car drivers could find shave a tenth of a second, but great race car drivers could shave a half a second or more
I'm supposed to be in the bathroom right now. You owe me, dude. Now get to butler!! You can still come late!
great pitch sequencing; going soft early and hard late
and hed kill me if his phone went off..
Very interesting. RT : Viewers of scripted TV are more tuned in until commercial breaks; different for reality programs
Appreciate you always including us, thanks!
Whats mine is mine.
The dead need love too LMAO: You know we coasting when corpse Bibby and Waterboy Toney are in the game”
I really wanna watch the lorax but 2 out of the 5 don't wanna watch it -.-
I've heard that's a hazard! Supposedly cinnamon gets stronger in anything you freeze too.
I remember when the Broncos lost to the Lions, SO many Raider fans trolled me LMFAO .. Where are those Raider fans now? They all blocked me.
Do you ever Watch any of the Sunday Morning Political News Shows?
Good morning, sir!!!!!!
Software Development Engineer, Senior-IEB (793776) / Microsoft ...
Playing at Branded Saloon in Bk this Saturday!! Who is coming ?
Find out why #healthcareworks with tonight: MT Join us 4 our tweet chat tonight @ 8pm use #VAHCR to discuss.
On Oracle: High system time utilization on fast machine
I lost three fucking bitch follower just fuck your self fucking pussy
I like that though, a LOT
The media preview of the new Dinosaur Hall at NHM is tomorrow morning! LA journos DM me to walk among the giants.
I'll definitely follow and check out I'm finding a lot of amazing bands lately!
Learn how to wrap them tightly up in themselves, then take trash out often. No need for diaper genie or anything tricky.
I had my first MRI on Friday, and boy, let me tell you, I had no idea I was that claustrophobic. That thing's like a coffin.
"These are the times that try men's souls." -Thomas Paine
"You really don't know. It was the look on their faces." Resonates with me every time I write. So much of life is departure from reality.
Are you on the journey?
Its not over tonight just give me one more chance to make it right
you're ruining my life! LMAO
October 15 masquerade heaven stage!!!
lmao, shoot i dont blame u for dumpster diving lol
's Double Choc/Single Chin brownies were a hit as we celebrated the start of a new school year. PATY is my fave cookbook!
i have my baby sis sleeping on my chest and i just noticed she has a big butt hehe xD :p
Emerging Talent: Theophilus London -
At Jimmy's Of Chicago singing karaoke with my bestfriend & her coworkers!
Hannah may or may not he wearing the jeggings I bought her. She has like 6 pairs of that color
You're a professional at ruining my mood. 😔
omg k. goodnight #crazzzythoughtsbeforebed 🎠
Thank everyone who paid 4 your education: parents sure, but also the taxpayers! Know you now OWE.
Like an idiot, I just watched Game of Thrones and missed all the live tweeting of Game of Thrones.
This cigarette smoke is about to kill me.
I used to be so into Sam Worthington. good times :')
I arrive in mystery, or MSY tomorrow if anyone wants to meet up for tea or alchemy. (p.s. MSY=New Orleans airport speak).
WE LOVE YOU SOO MUCH ! NEVER FORGET THAT! XX
Nadaaaa, you just ugly (;
Big things
How bout an AppleTV for like 50 bucks more?
I can't believe it's already been two years since my brother was born.
Join Chabad of Oregon @ Portland Parks & Recreation's Director Park TONIGHT for the first of 8 nightly lightings of the Menorah! Starts 5:30
That awkward moment when your coworkers ReTELLS you the really awkward and offensive story he forgot he told you
best back-to-school gadget is the iPad2
that's my FAVORITE video!!! Guavee' Juicayy!
On my way to trainin
Some people make your life better by walking into it, while other people will make your life better by walking out of it...
#WaysToImpressMe a completely different Steeze , a original style . Something I've never seen before.
I was interested in the meisner acting program at the studio but I didn't want to immediately jump into the two year program....
umm but it was worth it tho :)
Happy Thanksgiving to all!
Yeah, yeah. :) "I am not a Gadget" and I don't plan to have my face stuck in one for the whole three days of
how does anyone read that? Hope u make it out safe! Twitter wouldn't be the same!
I wanna make everyday the best day of your life....
Just for you, deary. You're welcome.
What a headache. Casart Coverings is for people just like you. No hassle. No mess. No hours of hard work. Just remove & reuse : )
Stickam Show tonight! BE THERE OR BE SQUARE! Also releasing some awesome things so come watch us do stupid shit and sing songs for you <3
Professor who helped youths in foster care systems charged with rape and ... - Daily Mail
how r brother's spirits? Wife and I sit behind PS bench, Broke our hearts Sat. We know how hard he worked. We're praying 4 him
Who you callin tonight
A: If you've signed publishing agreements, you can tackle the law on your rights. However, this isn't a quick or easy process
This is the day the Lord has made. Rejoice and be glad in it. Have a beautiful day.
hey sexy
Is it weird that I'd rather see what celebs wear on the daily than what they wear on the red carpet? Style isn't an annual event.
Theres a white homeless lady telling all the mexicans to fuck off. im just laughin.c:
thanks J!
I hope it is a good one. I remember when I was still a teenager, haha. :3 *snuggles*
We're announcing details about what we think is a pretty cool contest tomorrow. Stay tuned.
now I'm just waiting for my dad to get of the computer...
You know your roots when at the Mexican food place, they serve you limes halved with a squeezers.
Breakfast: Lake Quinault. Saw Big Cedar Tree. Lunch: Forks. Side trip, Cape Flattery. Dinner: Lake Crescent. Now: Port Angeles
The Hummer limo is really the douche bag chariot.
I have a lot of galleys but I still check out library books. I am now reading 5 books all at the same time!
Do not cook another thing Do not mess up another dish! ZuZu handmade breakfast tacos and more. Kids eat free after 5:30pm M-W.
10% off on all labor and materials until August 9th! Also, ask how you can make $$$$$$ through our referral program! :)
I hate making eye-contact w/ people who used to mean the WORLD to me
Ohmygawd. Fried oreos. Best shiz E V E R<3
Hey. Been a long time. All is well on this end. How are you & your fam? I was in DE for 24hrs in March.
of coarse my mom has to ruin the good mood!
Cochella in less than 24 hours
Truth! RT There is no pillow so soft as a clear conscience. -French proverb
Thanks! Those Pluck moms rock. RT : This is refreshing. High-five.
We get FREEZING winters! Like below -5! And we get HOT summers! In the low 100's! But right now, it is unusually cold.
Our generation DEFINITELY does not appreciate music history half of you don't know what the fuck you're listening to & how it started.
Valley Teen Applications are due (postmarked) today. More info www.valleyleadership.org.
but it's probably not going to change the meaning to go with the latter, which is style-guide correct
Grounds for divorce
you're awesome :) Thank you!
MY NIGGGGGA :D
RT : The PC is 30 years old today. Happy Birthday PC!
Nick Johnson wouldn't even be the best player at Calvert Hall High School
"Men are constantly trying to mentally un-dress me. I'm just trying to save them some time, that's all."
I want to work for you. How is this possible?
#Ballard Town Hall: "One of the most important roles of city gov. is to create a place that businesses can do well" ^jh
HOT staff mtg, who bets we hear about the SR directory?
THE REFS BEEN CALLIN BS IN THIS YEARS
your a freak !
excited for a fun event tonight! Sent you a DM. Talk soon.
Happy Vagina Monologues Day! (observed)
Some people make your laugh a little louder, your smile a little brighter, and your life a little better. You're that person.
Stop by in Morris, 304 Liberty St. 60450 for a free #wine tasting with 5 pm - 8 pm.
SO excited!!!!!
Watching Pretty Woman on Bravo! Love this movie.
That does not sound fun at all.
Best wake up call ever :P
where's that?
That awkward moment when you just got home from softball practice all sweaty and your brothers friends are right there... #OhHeyThere😳
that's a bummer, wonder what is going on.
In need of Secret Recipe now
Teamwork is the fuel that allows common people to attain uncommon results
Strawberry festival in an hour or so :) 🍓🍓🍓
What's the difference between a woman with PMS and a Pitt Bull? Lipstick.
If you could file a bug with support, we'll have a look at it.
I was supposed to see you but I couldn't I feel so bad 😢
Huge difference between response accountability and DRR accountability
It's ridiculous - why transplants? what's wrong with us? It's not like Beaver games are tragically underattended.
Joyce Banda next Malawi leader, Muluzi and Law Society say | Malawi news, Malawi - NyasaTimes breaking online news source from Malawi:
m lunch=rice, tiny bit of butter, crumbled wasabi nori and sunflower seeds.
Call of Duty Modern Warfare 3
RT : "Go to college" is to education what "put things in your mouth" is to cuisine.
#1 referer to OAC is Wikipedia. Another reason for archivists to contribute more to Wikipedia
yo! Went last time and didn't love it. All about Gjelina though.
Congrats to Dean Pees on becoming the Ravens new Defensive Coordinator. Also congrats on becoming a head coach in a few years thanks to Ray.
Nicki Minaj just set rap music back 15 years. The Grammys are probably just gonna do away with the rap categories now
I love that pinball wizard song and always have so I was slightly bias I am so glad they won they deserved it :D
Tons of new sale items now! Also we brought in over 300 new men's and women's items this week so far. Come by and check us out!!!
It's the last day of MCAS testing for many BPS schools! Congrats to all of our hardworking students and staff.
thanks so much for the spotlight yesterday! I can't wait to see all my Six Degrees friends at the first event of 2012!!
meek mill is going in right now on hot 97
On my way to Hollywood c:
bitch! I think I'll just go back to Cancun.. I didnt need a phone there.
Last Night Was Like WoW Lol
Dyed hair! C:
Hey twitter people...please tweet me everyday to and tell him you want me on the show!
#15peopleilove Sorry. Can't name 15 people, but 15 animals? Lassie, Mr. Ed, "Eddie," my 3 dogs & 1 cat, Secretariat, Affirmed, Alydar, etc.
i have my catherine chase horse necklace all ready to be worn for the derby!
SACRAMENTO BOUND in t-minus 9 DAYS!! =D
will Sean Payton become some sort of broadcaster for espn or one of the other networks?
Shit is about to get serious today and this week in the
The preceding tweet was a public safety warning brought to you by the Foam Weapon Fair Play Advisory Board.
I know right?!?! It's awesome...spendin' all day outside :D
As it turned out, "Luck" had everything but. Shame.
Good morning!!(:(: Hope you all have an amazing Sunday!! <3 you all!!
Nothin better than makin money but makin more!!!
Damn!!!! one of my stocks tanked 17%! Still not to bad of a loss but after 2 days of goin down I'm sellin!
I have a renewed love for Rented a car from and got two parking tickets for $52.50 each and paid a tow fee of $254.
leads Denver 6-5 at the intermission.
Feeling lazy on this gorgeous day in #Baltimore. Heading out to Fell's Point Festival!
Today is a beauty in the mile hi city ..
If we were playing kickball, I'd pick you first.
I just read a list of 'the 100 things to do before you die'. I'm pretty surprised 'yell for help' wasn't one of them...
just bought a house today- really great deal on a 2 unit rental
I'll retweet as my father's fighting Cancer
agrmts change over time and get lost. I bet a lot of jrnls dont register cpyrt. Not much $$$ in it, anyway.
Somewhere Dick Cheney is thinking "I could vote for this guy (Obama)" - well maybe for a nanosecond
im captivated by you baby, like a fireworks show.
I liked the first one. I think he had a knife.. But fine
Read a bit of the 1st book then got distracted. So I haven't ruined anything.
which kind? I love breakfast for any meal.
i left when you did
Never let people get to you. They can't pull the trigger if you don't hand them the gun.
well I do!
Hello Miami!!! We are ready to start the weekend with a lot of events. Yesterday we were participating in Art Basel Miami Beach!!
After your FREE pizza at come shopping at ! And bring us some Dublin DP!
whats wrong jess
It’s a piece of “gateau” (cake)!
They have the one that goes to where all the fishing happens.
#FlyMeToLondon so I can live with <3 x
and at Allen Fieldhouse... Cool...
Just unloaded at Tipitinas! We go in at 8:30
Red Onion in downtown #gso is awesome and cheap!
that appears to be Full Moon. If you are in Birmingham, make sure to try Jim and Nicks BBQ. Their cheese biscuits are great!
Just poured myself an Avery Maharaja to start the big game with.
she loves flowers but we have so many we've had to move them outside! I'll look into a gift basket. Thanks!
Thanx 4 nothing! u know who u are!
Us too !! > RT : are you coming to ??? Im djaying its gonna get so weird. Just like you like it.
Sometimes I feel like nobody loves America quite as much as I do... it makes me SO sad. Obama: why do you hate us?
RT : How's everybody doing for cinco de mayo? Y'all drunk yet? Lol<=mexican beer and french vodka... yeah, id say so!
Okay everyone, Geek Fight Kickstarter 2.0 goes live tomorrow!
bro you serious?! Of course we hoop! But we got graduation stuff going on. Tomorrow!
The Actors: 'Madagascar 3' goes on a European road trip - Los Angeles Times
you know who controls YOUR life? read the first word again. Don't let anyone else take control and make you do something yout not happy with
RT : Airship Norge crew dropped Norwegian, American & Italian flags over the N. Pole.
whats good man this ish is for the birds
Don't let them get you down. I know you'll get things going. Appreciate you very much.
Today I want all women to think with your MIND and not your BEHIND .......
Crack kills.
The second street clue is coming, the 1st is a street with a boro name...
Steve Nash wants the Suns to re-sign the NBA's Iron Man Grant Hill! Can't say I blame them, still a very effective starting Small Forward!
Joel anthony!!!
osu blowing out duke in 1st half!!!
Good morning everyone c:
Solid easy mile & a half w/ pig followed by some #yoga. We used to log serious miles in Madison & iola so it feels good to start up again!
my bullshit meter is going off. aye me. do they not know that it's easy to tell these things?
It's really been 15 years since the Titanic movie? Losing track of that much time scares me. I guess those older than me would say, "Ge...
OMG THAT VIDDY WAS SICK! NOW I REALLY CANT WAIT FOR SUNDAY!
Put on your bowling shoes and check us out at fireside bowl! Lots of awesome music! Bad bad meow plays at 9:30
Randy Levine exemplifies what I LOATHE about the Yankees.
It's a BIG difference than you Fat Hoe.... only yo fingers can fit a size 14!!!
Aaron I'm So glad u won the Superbowl. U deserve it. U should be the MVP of the leave. Fantastic season!
Thanks for the follow and for subscribing to the blog. Following you back!
I do all the driving, you do all the drinking challenges.
I think I've discovered the opening shot for the trailer! :-)
Wedding?! We need to catch up . . .
RT - Good luck to my boy paul fenaroli 2nite vs the jacksonville jaguars! Love ya kid.
Sometimes it does though...then again some people are just pokers indiscriminately.
the twins need to get their ass beat
Another #Drupal multi-lingual site gotcha learned: make sure to auto transliterate words with accents in URL paths.
I'm coming back there to lay down. And put my feet all over y'all
a lot of 1D fans have said that
I completely agree with you Adam.Rad and Kost. need to be taught a lesson about TEAM for all players to come.Rad was overhyped.
This is super exciting! I highly recommend Star Cast Auditions for aspiring actors! They're awesome! :)
Using my tweets from et al.'s #Latour panel from #4C12 to cite them... hm... how to reference...
Kya! I just saw the cutest little ducklings xD
Badgers are going to lay the hurt on #Orange tonight.
As a result of both of these, we are witnessing a almost total dismantling of all social gains, advancements, & government.
Hopes he knows what the fuck he's doin.
“: Much of what being decided for our country is being decided on falsehoods-
Girl you can have whatever you want, starting off with my last name 😉
love me some mac miller! haha
M... Melting Potatoes & Pearl Onions
ima sugar high from too many cookies T.T
At to hear talk from Frank Deford, one of my favorite sports commentators. Catch his commentary Weds on
haven't started, i have a final today and a paper due thursday. wanna send me yours?
Beautiful day in DC, lush Cherry blossoms everywhere!
Just walked by a booth called, "The $40,000 Money Tree." That doesn't sound schemey.
I know what I was thinking… but didn't realize the later records are so weak.
Over my dead body
95% of the sentences I say I end with the word "yo", just because
On Deck: Baby Shower....It's A GIRL!
Taking a break from the studio, hope to get out before 5:00 am!
That sounds perfect for you. Hope you like them! I just bought $160 in shirts...and moved across the country. I need to wait.
Good Morning,today we are at 7100 Commerce Way in Cool Springs **NEW LOCATION** from 11:15-1:30 with the FINEST country fixins in Nashville
First day back to school. Omg it's hard.
I smile cause I have nothing to frown about
Lovin' the profile pic! And glad to see you back on !
OH: I don't have any feet pictures.
most definitely. EMU for undergrad, worked at the Sidetrack, and grew up in Belleville down the road.
Reimold reaches first, legging out throw from Nunez. Ruled a hit. Nunez looked like he could have gotten it for
Always makes my day (: <3
hahha thank god we stopped talking
I WANT to listen to music while I work, but can't sing along because my office is open. Lame.
Don't nothing concern me accept homework and reppin my hood.... Hampton baby you already know lol
Going back to my old ways with these
Traffic on Reisterstown Rd in Owings Mills restricted to middle lanes b/c of water.
According the official rules of skunking, this is officially a skunk!
To all 2k11 year-end best-of list compilers: Any who do not include WOODEN BIRDS 'Two Matchsticks' needs to find a new hobby.
Ha! RT : Phew, glad it's morning! Lady in hosp bed opposite me sleep-argued with herself ALL NIGHT. In different accents! :o
Oxy Mo: Amature Expert (..or as we'd like to say... Intern!)
Lolk. I'm done with you.
will do. Thanks!
just getting started on using tweetdeck
Looking for a legal job. Do you think maritime law is a good niche to go into because of piracy? I can say "Arrrgh" well-:)
It matters not; The game was over when #Toronto scored 4.
Yes, the rest of the season doesn't matter.
Why don't wireless providers throttle users that don't use data instead of those that do? What do they need speed for?
I think I should read fewer novels in the genre of "well written but nothing happens." Maybe a good thriller next time.
Every night before bed, getting up and running at 7am sounds like a fantastic idea. And then the alarm goes off...
Today's lectures will be on the problem of slavery; and one on European colonization in the New World (mostly Spain and France)
We need 4 hugs a day for survival. We need 8 hugs a day for maintenance. We need 12 hugs a day for growth. -Virginia Satir
Malcolm Brown of takes the mic to explain Learning Analytics (& terminology creep).
this should be epic
Writers: The correct way to publicize your work is not to spam people asking them to "let me know what you think" with article links. Thx.
Late night/Early morning working on the contact list for this afternoon.
getting a library card is a pivotal moment. it's the first piece of ID you have. maybe first time someone says "i believe in you"
had SO many good scenes like when you gave up Trevor or funny scenes when you married Jake whatever you choose should win
I'm prez #flipclass at #NCTE12 in Vegas. Look me up if you're there. Also be presenting at
This nigga look like turtle with the shield knock off!
Hey ARE YOU FUCKING READY FOR TOUR!?!?!?
it's a change of pace! fun to wake up with folks and have a little fun :)
RT : dont cry in your beer, you'll just be watering it down...
thanks for the follow! digging your designs! have you checked out our specialty waterbased & discharge inks?
Married with children! Polk high football rules!
Never really paid much attention, but a lot of black girls smoke cigarettes...
whether you are right or wrong, NeVaaDans get to choose. It's a bit of a worldwide custom, from what I gather.
Happy National Nutrition Month! What’s your best nutritional tip for the masses?
I want an android this time.
I bought nexus gear homie not corre stuff
hey so um you are P E R F E C T ♥ . NO MATTER WHAT EVERYONE SAYS!!!! kbyee (: oh & ilove u . ♥'
Making a dent
We are located at the 215 & Tropicana exit, across from Walmart shopping center.
2nd dude already on. $350 minimum bid.
Football!!!! oh sunday what a beautiful day you are!
Am I the only one that finds it wacky that the iPad simulator's chrome doesn't look like the iPad itself?
ok im done with this 1;)
I don't think I've been this tired in my life!
Dude story of my life. Fucking awesome huh?
My life is yo Entertaiment....So watch me....ill live it....so I hope u catch my gud side......
thanks for the tweet :)
at least she knows we don't do any of her homework she assigns.. Why take notes if all her quizes are open book
Hey, , what's the point of the signin sheet at the BTD if some dude is just gonna yell 'Who's next?' and take whoever shows up?
It's gotta be more than Dat to bring me down
Once we have more Q1 numbers in, they will be posted at our website.
Heading to The Conch Republic this weekend! Margaritas on me!
Tickets are now available for our inaugural concert! Sept18th.
My son also has a CHD. He has Tetralogy of Fallot.
I bet you still read it.
#RIPBig we will never forget you.
They say to write what you know. I say write what you love.
Chillin in the room, tryinna figure out what ta wear
RT : #talentmindset - some of us have it and we can help others build it with data. Like HR Moneyball, right?
I love in-flight internet! Flying high over Oklahoma right now.
how's the discount world
LOL I hope and I'm 17 (;.
I was thinking Northern Iowa.
what do u want to eat
love to!
at school im not obsessed but i do talk about it once a while
I would barter off like eight generations of my future ancestors to be able to go to London Fashion Week. Accept my form of payment!
“ Lmaoo im single i can do wtf i want...” You ain't No Real BestFriend Nomore You Juss a Friend Nbs
my phone is pissing me off so dam bad I am going to brake this dam phone..
Yes Gettin My Hair Cut !! Thank God . :)
So what does everyone think about Joran Van Der Sloot's 28 year sentence?
The Frantic at Beat Kitchen in Chicago tomorrow night with All Ages! Get your tickets before it sells out!
When you look better than his ex>
Not much of a hunt in Werth's beard #justsayin RT Who's up for an Easter egg hunt inside of the Beard?
Think I'll just stroll over to the local grocery store. I'm sure it won't be that crowded.
Giants and Cubs
colorado bound. looking forward to exciting racing , seeing friends and cooler temps. go !
The CASHER says take the UNDER in the Purdue/Western Michigan bowl game. Under is the play..
Are you going to start livestreams again?
Minor Set Back for a Major Come Back !
yes I went on Instagram and it kept saying user not found:/
Yeah, introduced me to too. Great stuff!
Belated congrats to for move to DC to work for WashPost! Better stock up on great Tex-Mex and BBQ while you still can!
I don't know why Whedon fans get so huffy about the infallibility of the man's work. It's cray cray.
“: There are about 50 #Kentucky fans at Houligan's in Daytona Beach, FL. Pretty good little turnout. #BBN #WeAreUK”
you sexy ;)
Its guys like u that make girls not trust men.
dude dont let anyone bring u down people r just stupid, u know ur the bigger person
Realizing my head phones are held together mostly by tape and a prayer tonight means I'm probably due for a new set. Again.
Link is returning a 502
ONE DIRECTION
My yoga teacher had a handlebar mustache. I have mixed feelings about this. Definitely reminiscent of a creepy carnival man.
Demi allegedly went to a divorce attorney but she & Ashton also went camping last weekend. Sounds a lot like Brad & Jen.
Congratulations! We received a similiar award from this year, and it boosted our passion. We are so proud of you!
To what?
we had a burger today, but no brew!!
Welcome boo! [;
"Without You" Apache Chief (Feat. Denny Love) is now available on iTunes! Go get it!
i just want to be happy
lol yea I do.. Gotta fill the sleeves in and imma add color
you've got my vote! Good luck.
Pulled hip muscle (I think). The waddle suggests prolonged pain. This sucks.
"you're only on page six?" "I'm trying to read and watch tv at the same time."
no probs bro. I can't wait to be workin with people like yall. I love the way yall are passionate about the craft.
As much as acting as GM of Moto is great experience/practice, I miss our real GM! I hope he feels better soon!
all caught up on 'girls'. It's annoyingly really good and more annoyingly getting better. I like it!
tomorrow evening till Thursday morning
While recording the Jazz Lab band concert a man approached me and said, "Why you don't look like Mark Streder at all. [pause] Thank god."
just confirmed 3 more Seattle-ites coming with to the June 10th show at the Showbox in Seattle!
liked your article "DISHed Out"!
spaghetti + meatballs or meat sauce. discuss.
Sometimes your knight in shining armour is just an idiot wrapped in tin foil....
lol. no. i am a walking miracle. in Texas. that happens every other week.
wat he say?
i cant wait to see her face when she finds this out. #sneaky baster
Surprised that my supervisor didn't seem to know that 3 is to 4 as trilogy is to tetralogy. Is it really that rare a word? ^^;;;
I follow you :)
go looki at my background on twitter Those pics, would u please be able to put all those photos from that day on <3 xoxoxo
BajaLicious SO great to have you back! RT : im back! Baja chicken #burrito ! Taste Great!
I find social media very exciting. So much opportunity to connect to the world around you -- not to mention the power of social buzz.
I am bi and you ?
Join us tomorrow @ 6:30pm for the 's Annual Membership Meeting & Dinner at GWU's Marvin Center!
This weather makes me want to sleep all day
I can't wait to go fishing and hunting with my papa again!!
hahaha no i dont! I'm back, im black
NEWWORLDCULTURE"S LOUNGE SKATESHOP GRAND OPENING MAY1 WIT AZ"s OWN DJ ELEMENT GIVEAWAYS DA WHOLE 9 ..haha Page Themes Page Themes Page The
There is always, always, always something to be thankful for.
Good morning, luvs!!!
Looking for a Account/Project Manager to join the growing Cinecraft team...
Not a good week for Spanish sides in the Champions League. Maybe they'll have more luck in the Europa League
If you invested in Citi Group at a 99 cent sale today you are a happy camper
Done with all my exams
2 chainz is a walking dread lock
Looking for promoters to add to our staff. If your a social, outgoing person please get in contact with us, and see what it takes.
is killing it in the studio right now!
RT if you love jeans! Where have you found your favorite denim duds?
Last night we were played on 88.3 wxav!!! Request to hear us!
good morning whats new
Deena Pierott and Maria Rubio will be moderating the discussion today
Hah! I'd be too embarrassed! Though every year we have a game night at our library, maybe then I'll make a video :)
This weekend on The Trail: Corvette Show at Winery at La Grange; Harmony Place Charity Benefit and Scott Murray at the Philip Carter Winery
"People are strange when you're a stranger, faces look ugly when you're alone."
is my fav too!!
Hear with your EARS, but listen with your HEART ~ Lori Brewer
RIP Dick Clark a true American Icon
!!! “: Living with a #Cancer will bring unexpected mood swings. You never know what tomorrow will bring!”
Thank you so much for including me in this!
We are now incorporated! We can now state that our name is Allerent Consulting Inc.
Don't just keep it all for yourself....INSPIRE!
Can it be the weekend already!!!?
The power of Happy Hour 4pm- 7pm. Vodkas infused, Gypsy performances and you with us makes for a great time! 👍👉🍸🍴🍻🍛🍰
GOP: Jobless rate dropped because many have given up looking for work. Question: Will those people vote, and which way are they leaning?
I got the Kit Kat World Variety yesterday! Different than I expected. Cool, though. :)
ok thats cool
How do you get 1,000 Jews in a phonebox? Throw in a pound coin. How do you get them out again? Tell them it's a gas chamber.
Potential of #Pinterest will be interesting to watch, new blog post coming soon Thanks for your replies!
STIX the CAT sez, "Love Dorothy Parker!"
Hi Angelo. It's his HRs AT HOME that amaze me. He's on a pace for 53 AT HOME. Maris when he hit 61 in '61 had 30 AT HOME !
what are you going to school for?
Nature FREAKS me out!!!!
I want to go to Disney World.
uh too late ..
The Hobbit is good but my dearest book is The Runelords and they are making it into a film
What a gorgeous day to be eating lunch outside
Lol you gonna catch these hands RT : or what? Lol and no the fuck they not ! They all bout that life ! Lmao
yeah I find it better than giving my my mom a "coupon that's good for 1 hug" lol 😄
lol tell me where it happened and I'll tell you of you're right
the school year went by suppppeeerrr fastt.
YES!!!!!!!! I'll let you borrow it when I finish :D
Also, hey, welcome to 's BootCamps! We're so excited to have you here! :)
I'm in a great mood today! It is kinda weird because today I've got a literature test. Oh well! #Awkward :p
Happy Birthday , have a good one!
coolness. Thank you! do you guys promote mendeley to students? if so, free vers. or paid?
Yes I, Selassie I know, BIG UP all the FARMER MAN worldwide on 420
Thanks for the follow Heidi! I'll be back in Indy soon - hope to see you!
I been busy
What he said RT : Y'all need to be following her --> RT : For the sake of MY future, you're going to vote for Mitt Romney
Too bad they can't all be awesome like me. RT “: Some of my followers are retarded”
I want boba.
First thing: I'll setup a github project for sharing code. Go there and register for an account. Let me know your username.
Seami Motokiyo~ Life is a lying dream he only wake Who casts the World aside.
Suprisingly, Russell outfits 6 FBS football teams. GA Tech is their 'flagship program' though...agreed to a 10-year deal in 2008
Making some awesome upgrades to our website!
yeah, i know they're playing DB i just didnt know where. Haha
almost! I just have to analyze a couple quotes but then i have a whole other paper to do
go to sleep....
Personal beauty is a greater recommendation than any letter of reference
omg me too:( its depressing me<\3
so is Pat, I like Pat, I don't care what's its real name is, its Pat to me.
Youth tonight. (:
You never fail to show #FF love. Thanks, Twarent. Hope the two of you have been well! Lunch overdue.
One stop shop for custom tees & CD duplication! 20 years at it & Core Media is an industry leader in music. Ask about our Bundled Specials!
Follow me back ppl ! Thanxx
Been pretty happy. Had an awesome Kahuna x Milsap heifer calf. Dealing with a new baby that doesn't want to suck right now.
#thankyouJustin for your talant personality Smile and everythinng you do !! I love you no and Always Will Always Be a BELIEBER !!!
I cannot wait til basketball season is over
About to fly out to England to find out if there is any truth to this Kris Boyd rumor!
Woo 200 followers
Me to daniela you like pulling on your pubs maddie to daniela u like eating your pubs james to daniela wouldn't they get stuck in ur braces
Hate being sick:/
I may have to go to the CWS!
"What is a miracle?"
#LNYHBT looks like BO's favored sex pref groups w/ a few extras tossed in. Don't give him ideas! ":
Tonight's presentation is about Microsoft's cloud offerings. Let's see how they compare against Amazon's.
probably is`
in 5-billion years, the spirits once known as "humans" will be the size of planets, and hop-scotch across space-time.
NEW BLOG POST: SEC CHARGES TOBACCO COMPANIES WITH VIOLATIONS OF FCPA
Dang mavericks arena looks sweet in that blue out
“: Aight rtb it is this year guys no exceptions it's local! It's a must....” ur going?!
A third party seller hijacked the main buying option, but Amazon has it for $9.99, new, from them.
#inthesummer i will be taking drivers ed :D
but.... Avocados are nasty. Ruin alot of good sandwiches............
i would love to work with brandy ... and Amerie ....and mary j
Not used to seeing someone other than #Valverde on the mound in a save situation.
well now ur just proving facts
Retreat with my confirmation group tomorrow then Arise. Going to be nervous as hell. I'm not cut out for this
Quinn.! Don't do it.! If you date him, that means you've dated everyone but Mike.!
Realize that there`s a difference between falling in love with someone and falling in love with the idea of being with them
The basketball wives commentary is so loud on my TL right now..So much analysis
I find it wierd because my cousin has MORE followers, and more tweets than me and I started my twitter first.
No way. I already set the bar as high as the US Bank building!! “: worried about the competition?”
if only you saw what i can see ,.. - what makes you beautiful <3
Just found out that I missed the 2012 Long Beach Grand Prix. Now I have 11 months to plan for 2013.
oh yeah I'm flattered haha
Worst witnesses on the planet?.... ATTORNEYS. They are-- we both know it. (Engineers a distant second)
No kidding. Please make it stop.
I feel like i cant breathe, D:
Sold out. Shoot
nothing better than #traderjoes wine & tomato-less salsa and !
We are open Monday 12:30 to 6 pm. Thank you for your business.
Who is Jason Marquis? He wouldnt pull his BABY antics over in the #Orioles dugout .... bet on that !!!!
In honor of the Rangers Home Opener-- Texas Rangers Gelato is back! Go Rangers!
Wonder what thug thought of this
SHOUTOUT TO TAYLOR FROM VIRGINIA! I LOVE YOU BOTH! <3 143
If she can go long enough without talking...lol.
Let me take my ass to work on my day off grrr
In Blogger Corp training for
Did someone get a UPS delivery? RT : Definitely found former Northwestern QB Zak Kustok at the Derby
The art of government is the organization of idolatry.
CC cost me
Enter to win advance screening tix to #LOCKOUT & qualify to win 2 passes indoor skydiving! Txt SKYDIVE & ur ZIP CODE to 43549!
next time!
Keep the world safe
Former colleague, , is talking abt #interedition annotation server--based on OAC-=that really shows the emerging standards potential
this one I'll wholeheartedly agree with!
"India conquered and dominated China culturally for 20 centuries without ever having to send a single soldier across her border."
Congrats to Norfolk State who played the perfect game at the perfect time. Now go put the slipper on & keep playing Cinderella.
Where's this fool ? Prob the post office
sports awards <3
thanks dude! I rewrote it before I posted it and I think it's alright.
Omg so many people are cryig. I just wanna give them all a hug :'(
ITS ALL GOOD!!!! HOWS YHUR MUSIC BEEN GOIN???? Follow me so i can give yhu my number
RT : Bottom of 10th in Cleveland. C'mon #Tribe!!
just because i say i love you doesn't make it so..
I'm a selfish girl when it comes to you
Best part is the built-in use of Google's HTML5 PDF viewer for PDF search results in Chrome.
That's right I said 'trying' lol good memory...
So I need a Meningitis Shot for school! Good luck to me!
Having a BLAST wit
Let's pursue our passion and purposes with every fiber of our being in 2012! Let's GET IT!!!!
Interesting VM from a guy that wanted my biz. Unfortunately for him he failed to hang up, and now I have a great MP3 of him talking smack.
I have to admit you got me on that one. Too tired and we have to head up to LA later today.
Great meeting you yesterday ! What apps do you use for Twitter on your phone?
and you would be nothing without my presence in your life
I knew I smelled horses in china town!
you don't sound like anyone Iknow. must have accidentally tweeted u...certainly steering clear now, whew!
hahha nah it's cool! I'm a senior in high school. But ima graduate in like 3 weeks :)) u like college?
According to the Guinness World Book of Records, the closest record is 19,431 miles in 19 days, 8 hours and 30 minutes.
Maybe I should of kept that to myself ..
Studio life!
Understood. My babies turned 3 yrs one month ago. #andiwantanother!
You do realize a kid died behind it, right? It's serious.
Solid Game 11 and 5! when we gonna see the first double double! im feeling it soon
Okay im done for awhile
VA Delegate Ed Scott welcomed annual Legislative Trail Ride weekend to Madison County. Several House, Senate and McDonnell officials here.
im going to show at NYC sunday!!!! who else is coming???
I'm glad Kim won #Survivor. She played the best game by far.
Learned a lot from other people today. Learning is always good.
What's film?
hahah fair enough some people think I'm 30 ad I'm nowhere near it so I feel ya
happy belated anniversary!! All the best!
Oh and green tea. Thank the god(s) for it everyday.
Pain is when you are at the DMV and the photo area is backed up. So they stop calling at C249 and you are C250
i also need more friends the like to film music videos for fun...
Camping Food: Make your fav omelette before you leave. Place in ziplock bag, put in cooler. For breakfast, warm bag in hot water and enjoy!
I'm pretty sure Tim has one from our Christmas present swap/fight thing we do. bought it :)
Reflexology stimulates reflex points on the feet & through the nervous & other systems positively affects other parts of the body & organs.
Need to ride
me!! thats usually what I wear around the house
At the KY REN FAIRE site, what a beautiful venue and day for the Field Party 3
haha I did already. Was giving me a headache. I'm so tired, but for some reason I just can't fall asleep.
He can't stay healthy? Yes, let's base that off one season. In 3 years if that's the case, we can talk.
The Replacement Wife by Eileen Goudge. And You?
Independent Spirit Awards
Thanks for the 842 Love " love the 842 makes me smile every time i take a whiff"
H-O-T again today. My pate brisee is very soft. Let's hope it will stick together long enough to roll out!
Happy Birthday fellow #tAG member
You @ me first
Oh rehearsals with AKL... Always funny dialogue.
MT : Confidence is often viewed as arrogance, see it as intellect - NOTHING can be accomplished without it.
Booking for the Dallas BOTB, call me (216)240-7582 or email for more info!
Really felt the love yesterday. Thank you for all the bday wishes.
Watching Hangover 2 with Patrick. One of the funniest movies. lol Aahhaha. Im stuck in an elevator. lmfaoo
no I haven't. I like "everyday" though.
In another life, I would make you stay.. So I don't have to say you were the one that got away </3
Did we really have to move up one spot to get Trent? Did the Vikings have a trade in place with him?
watching TECO, MDHI, SHMN and SNET those are the talk of the chatroom right now
thank you Gary. But my son is an inspiration to me. I couldn't be the father I am without them
I'm so unbelievably excited for tonight at it's almost ridiculous
I have the most retarded hips on the entire world >.< every time I walk it cracks.
will do
straight up
George W. Bush endorsement of Romney was about as warm as a Dick Chaney Christmas Card to the ACLU.
Wright was a luxury pick. Holmgren said 'we wanted to have our cake & eat it too". He knows about cake.
so glad to hear that, anything you need me to help you just let me know.
dude - does alice soccer have a google calendar??
Lets go #kansas...you ate my national champion team.....I dont need my bracket busted more
Searching through the typical inbox? It’s a little like keeping your entire closet in a pile, then searching through it for your favorite so
Party at the museum was weak Josie needs a new boy friend he OLD lol me and Em hit up Munchi bar n it was DOPE SON #BuddysBluesAShortFilm l
twitter is so addicting!
Woke up from the weirdest dream... and were in it...Not sure what to make it of it lol
Hey thanks! You like? I just got it. Does it fit okay?
haha. No it would middle school if we went for matching anklets. Which of course I am now thinking we should do.
I'm not a Dodger fan but mayor does not belong on the same field as Vin Scully is a crook and a piece of garbage
The best place to store a Firehook baguette is in your stomach. We recommend you eat your baguette the day you buy it.
Are you coming to Katie's cabin in a few weeks? It would be super sweet if you are!
Thank you for the awesome work. I love everything you've done for me so far. You rock :-)
TelCel's 3G network in CaboSanLucas is prob The fastest Internet I've ever seen on my phone. What's up AT&T? And yes, been working on vacay.
Guys who shave their legs. No.
. No. I thought MIDDLE SCHOOL: THE WORST YEARS OF MY LIFE was absolutely robbed last year during award season. Robbed, I say.
no prob dude
I'm only focused on my education & maintaining my lifestyles of pay rent and bills
Wakin up a lil late!! Lots to do today Gotta get my baby ready to go and then taking off to Mathis! All before 4! = /
Any colleagues at #alamw12 want to do dinner tonight? Tweet back dm!
man i bet, i could barely do when i did it
Yessir. May 10th will be my first day back in the lab
They just don't learn
I mustache you a question.
She looked gorgeous! RT Emma Stone should be named MVP of awards season.
BL to Elizabeth at Ritz Chicago '02 "Is that Bono?" E: "Why yes it is Bono" BL: "But he ain't no Keith Richards!". B4 Aragon gig
YOU'RE CRAZY.
Accountability is huge in social media
your a little deep post-modern photographer arnt you.
Still doesn't compare to Blass last year when Alvarez went yard.
should go on a retweeting spree and retweet my tweets..... :)
If I had the money I would be #shopping at cause they #dontstarttheholidaysearly unlike Bilo who does November 1st!
buildin a studio bro?
Separate yourself from the competition w/a powerful resume that is LinkedIn ready. Free resume critique
Click on DETAILS in the app, it'll explain the data! Has to do with earth's mass variations.
It's officially Christmas time! Watching Elf with my sister.
“A children's story that can only be enjoyed by children is not a good children's story in the slightest.” C.S. Lewis
Got Ketchup On My White T-Shirt.
yeah Weeden provides fresh blood/ "hope" that Colt can't reproduce
Even I am not heartless enuff not to acknowledge this tweet! That's whats up fam! Miss you too!
RT Rain is the best!! I love it so much!
why did twitter change my profile pic again?
"The lunatics on the left are wrong" - brilliance from
Congratulations lady, you drive a brand new Lexus. That doesn't give you the right to be a fucking bitch to everyone.
Everyone check out our Facebook page and don't forget to like it while you're there! WWW.facebook.com/ALMFPromotions
Not looking pretty but 15 points in 6 matches feels fantastic! Need to keep grabbing points while teams are unsettled and finding their way!
yes it was ...brown n big jk jk lol I'm tripping
No Irn Bru, I'm afraid but some Scottish treats are available at a British pub. Otherwise I just send for stuff.
We're curious: What is the most interesting thing that you've seen or heard at #PLA12?
no, DON'T! PLEASE! I'M BEGGING YOU DON'T DO IT OMG NO
600 likes!!!! Thanks everyone :) I'll try to think of something special to do in celebration...hmm...
Rob Swanson said you're a G !!!!
#ListeningTo the audiobook version of "The Story of You" by Really cool book.
This show is doin too much
11pm on a saturday night and I'm getting my butt kicked by a sermon from an 18 year old kid....
It would be nice to start planning for it.....am game as i enjoyed in Zambia
Well of course. Makes measuring how the disbursement of taxpayer funds is divvied up MORE opaque. #transparency winning
#InTheSummer I spend every second with my friends (:
Further confirmation of Divine presence....Steelers Won!
We are back up, thanks everyone for your patience!
I will never say NEVER!
Lighting has a significant impact on both the aethestic and functional elements of your living space
If people insist on acting like an idiot, I must insist on treating them like one.
Your truck has the taco vista.
#HappyBirthdayGRANDman we all love you! hope its fantastic! :) <33
Absolutely! I'll be all duck'd out in yellow and green :)
He must be on steroids. #cheater RT : Congrats Jered Weaver! And fuck the Twins.
i hope one day i get to meet you:(
YEAH BABY!
Feeling a-ok with only 3 hrs of sleep, but I'll be taking it easy tonight to rest up for work this weekend. Laundry &
Proposals FGS, OGS and article. Getting it done after NGS.
World Peace out here flourishing
Just landed in LA to HAIL
I heard they're what colored kids do, I dunno, don't hang around em for that reason
Dont limit investing to the financial world. Invest something of yourself, and you will be richly rewarded.
Just got a molar removed!
But u stay calling my phne from different #'s bc I wnt answer urs
Apparently, someone left the door open and Monday sneaked in. Again.
or even carrier pigeon would have worked
wow, i have a poo, bookie, boo boo, pookie bear, baby mama, mo mo, wookiewoo AND a wifey...........lmao, n NO im not gay, these r my GURLZ
it means data is a malleable form. You can data into anything.
Belated Thank you!!!
If u wont that hammer ima nail u
What time will you guys be in tomorrow?
Wait why is mining one of the most entertaining aspects of Mass Effect 2??
“: Twitter is a great connection tool but a horrible relationship tool.”// agreed
Catholic bishops incensed by Obamacare rule mandating contraceptive coverage. More incensed than they were over child sex abuse.
I live very close to there! : where in Albuquerque? I used to live on Indian School near University, years ago.
so did you get a new iPhone?
I couldnt possibly disagree with your point more That decision has exactly 0% chance of standing. But thanks for the RT :)
The most expensive phone number sold was cell phone number 666-6666, auctioned off for charity in Qatar. It sold for $2.7 million.
Moving offices today. Giving up lots of space to gain a window. Think it's worth it? I feel lucky just to have an office. And a job.
MUST FOCUS
How Freud duped the church: , who promotes friendships btwn married men and women, responds to :...
soft gentle touch for sure! ;)
"Although the last survivor may proclaim himself universal Emperor, his reign will be brief and his subjects will all be corpses."
I just want it to be lunch so I can eat my amazing hot pockets.
please call this number 254-716-4646 Please its my friends birthday! :) She would be so happy! :) 55
that was an instrumental classic TV theme :-)
Thanks for cOMing!
For parent friends asking me about cloth diapering: I recommend GroVia to begin, then sample others after that. So easy; great fit for all.
People are sick.
Gonna watch another episode of Rupaul because that's some quality programming.
Ha. I might as well have dropped it as much good as it was doing.
just feel better, cleaner!!
Are $17 hamburgers still a thing?
#top10favouritebands: Tigerdirect, , new egg, Dell, HP, Apple, Sony, Toshiba, IBM, Gateway.
lol! Thx man!!! RT : Good seeing you too bro!We were looking for you.BTW that A7 is meeaann!
yes!! finally not tired. I Wrote two more songs, one you need a verse on.
Tune in tonight @ 8p PST on Fox Soccer Channel to watch vs Big match for the Timbers, playoffs are within reach.
Um no ~LOVE . BE AFRAID.~
I just saw the wiener mobile crashed into a house on the news.
are you doing rails for fun & $ now? Or just for fun?
Come into Posh tomorrow and celebrate Tim Tebow Day! Channel 9news will be here! Come show your BRONCOS SPIRIT!
Nutritional supplements play a role in my anti-aging strategies, despite the outcries of the university/hospital based gerontologists
Off Work !
New website on the way + free goodies!
Never surprised by all the talking heads trying to push up stocks. If things are so good let's the numbers do the talking. Short some more
you are right re crowdfunding but sec 201 is good; will do away with general solicitation ban for all accredited rounds
Radio story about yahoo CEO falsifying resume...checked it out on Google. And there you have it.
Checking out our temporary space for Lost and Found (Opening on April 5th). It is going to be amazing!
thanks for the love
sent u another one
Hahaha RT": “: Just take a xanax, you'll forget it ever happened.” I need one after this game"
Just so you know... I'm hosting a contest for my next video girl
How does it Work real time ..Well U R the Boss What you say goes But, endless unseen enemies undermine U passive aggressive Ppl gnaw at U
“: How did you like the initial surprise?” it was just me. And it was cool
RT Evan Christian performing tonite at the Jazz Estate
I figured twitter needed me back
Happy birthday
The mysterious hole is not meant for abuse or misuse...
#10ThingsThatAnnoyMe taste in foods
That too! I would've spent so much money and if my mom paid I would've felt bad. I don't regret it, I'm sick anyways :(
Rep Hochberg states money doesn't always guarantee success in schools but lack of money almost ensures failure.
A laugh is a smile that bursts.
I should star in my own show called That's So Ratchet
What the HECK was that last Tweet? ;)
Each of us has a fire in our hearts for something. It's our goal in life to find it and to keep it lit.--Mary Lou Retton
Pete, the song is the least of our problems.
Right, they -match up- better... not saying they -are- better.
Slight chance of storms here in south central Illinois for this Sunday.
Truth! He clearly didn't think this through. RT The longest anything is a terrible idea
I'd be interested in finding out how many public institutions use NSSE surveys as primary measure of student engagement?
QT : #RT IF YOU GOTTA BIG DICK .most of the niggas that rt'd know damn well they are lieing.
Today the Lord answered an urgent prayer 4 a friend in gr8t need. Bro't to tears by His tender mercy to her ~ that's our great God!
Divorced the past .... Married to the present ... sleeping with the future !!!
My wife loves homemade gifts.
That awkward moment when you forget to flush the toilet....
thats good and you are welcome
Great lunch with to discuss websites & blogs & Christmas cards & many other things!
Highlight of my night last night- waiting on Dr. Broom and Dr. McBride.
no problem! Just need a few more people to pay and I'll order them..I just can't afford 25 shirts
Man, what a way to end Tribes ! Near record attendance again, prayed over/encouraged our seniors and played more dart wars.
So true<3.
": Love #wifeswap" He was acting ape-ish.
they're so eager for other communities to use it. Said they'd travel to do dog & pony show.
I Need To Clear My Mind!
Strawn is a very engaging speaker
I KNOW! Fucking sucks. Alcatraz was just getting going too.
someday a use will come for your domain. I need to get one just in case I ever feel like starting a site.
General Geek Fight Q&A as well as showing off the custom card sleeve prototypes!
Good luck to my Puerto Rico representer in his fight tomorrow. LATINO STAND UP MAYNE
It could be sunny so you could eat on the patio... But still, pretty sweet place to wake up.
nigga I texted you back right when I got the message and you JUST now texted me saying you forgot
Got first in the 100 and hurdles.
Welcoming our newest members summermom, jlinroos, cajack and our 100th member NV-Amber. Welcome aboard all and enjoy!
It would turn into an episode of the First48 after she killed me
Look out for the grand opening of that PO$ITIVE PU$H online store!!
It's been 3 months since I've last been on twitter! Hope everyone has had a great summer/Labor Day weekend. Great to be back tweeting!
why not?
hello tweet me if u wanna tlk :D
He like da orange an yellow startburst...i like da red an pink...we a perfect match....
oh you! Haha
WTF! Does Cooper even know what case he's arguing?
but if you read that... please follow back so i can DM so i can talk to you, that's all i have to say left. tbc
Thank you for following.
The new blackberry has a 3 megapixel camera and a 2.44" 320x220 screen. I think Zack Morris had a better phone.
About to play Spice Girls Wanna be on for you!
thanks for the #FF! We hope you have a wonderful weekend. :)
Where can I get cd @
Sitting here.. Bored.. Listen to all different kinds of music.. With my cousin..
you were busy tho :( with your boy toy lol
Great deal for passengers visiting MKE. Thanks for the tweet and supporting
Don't forget to pick up a bottle of Stinky for your football party!
Anywho... Good morning
Came home to some Felipes pizza
Back from a wonderful holiday vacation. Thank goodness I have receptionist support from Davinci Virtual! $99/mo so worth it! dv.co
American idol :) 👍
Sent! Thanks for the help.
on AIM now: afteritendszach come say hi.
If they play BOOTY SHAWTS from in my class today...I'm going to drop
You're forgiven RT I sometimes sign my name as Brook-Krol just to pretend what it would be like if my bday wish came true :( FML
Bedtime with peanut and kiwi ☺💤
Google+ desperately needs to allow users to make RSS feeds from their public posts!
Is there a more athletic team than the ?
Yeah, I know. I'm going to summarize rest of the book. (Just read whole thing last night...) when you read aloud fudging works.
I love the Kate Sessions pic
Guess I am going to have start bartering Klout points for work favors!
#usguys Thx for telling me abt this great community and impact its made in your social media journey. Look fwd to connecting!
smooches Juditka miss u!!
Look at me wen im talking to u
hey, I see you are a piano player.. Where are you from?
Ryan!! I'm creating a YouTube account and I'm going to give you a shoutout video(:
on south campus?
Man i need sum pussy now
(that was directed at them, not you. Not clear from context, sorry!)
I got fraped&my account is linked
Blake all these people are stupid. In the history of film making has there every been a movie based on a book? NO! Dummies
im good. You comin through this weekend?
I know the price of success: dedication, hard work, and an unremitting devotion to the things you want to see happen. -Frank Lloyd Wright
saw you at ICON friday, dont know why i didnt say anything, i was nervous lol:$
Congratulations to Jason Sudeikis on winning the MTV Movie Award
I want a Sit-n-Spin again!
Now they're talking about planets being sling shot....what???
haha I love our little "joke";)
Jeff: I think when you get into librarianship, there aren't a lot of dropouts or short-term quits, which is good
Bobby Abreu signs with the , continuing Los Angeles baseball teams' obsession with signing 38-year-olds.
Welcome to the hotel California...
Her writing style reminded me of your blog.
I need to get my rep up, atleast I dont embarrass myself on twitter #fuckitdoe .... Who does that??
come on mang
#Chiefs Rookie Camp- Wylie has some impressive speed and explosion out of his cuts. He can get separation in a hurry. Great flexibility.
PLEASE follow ! IT IS Jaden Smith's FIRST OFFICIAL ARMY! please go follow & support (clearly you love himtoo!
Thank you for the welcome, Ms. Travers! :)
Beauty is is the eyes of the beholder.
That awkward moment when you are watching the proactiv commercial and that black girl thinks shes cute rising her eyebrows
If art doesn't make us better, then what on earth is it for
Wait, that tweet had a typo. It's suppose to be Volume 14.19
Is that Ben Hogan officiating the Michigan-notre Dame game?
PUSSY DONT WHIP ME I WHIPS PUSSY " CLAP CLAP'
thank you!
B-day party in the park now it's time ti head to Amway for the Lakers vs Magic. Love Orlando!
I just finished a 3.09 mi run with a pace of 8'49"/mi with Nike+ GPS.
Thank you for following Sophia! Downloaded the toolbox.
Cory Gunz!! Can you DM me your email?! i NEED to send you some heat bro!!
Coach carter is such a great movie!! 🏀🎥
What's your favorite song/s by fall out boy
also, as a quick aside, customs in Nassau has got to be staffed by the most miserable, rude low-lifes I've ever seen. it's like they (cont)
And finally the Michelangelo Baconioni: a sweet potato and bacon pancake with honey butter and maple syrup.
Father's Day- the wife runs a triathlon starting at dawn, Fantasy Poker League at Bikinis in Austin.
is there alcohol involved? Greetings from crap ref baseball ;)
I felt all left out, not tweeting about anything so heres my black friday tweet! with and
Oh my god, when the hell did I say that?! That must've been so long ago!
At California Women Lawyers dinner in Monterey. Women rock. :)
Why do #cops drive like #assholes?! Even when they aren't chasing anyone.
I look forward to debating Tammy Baldwin on the very moral principles of our philosophies - Eric Hovde
“: Writing about happiness while sipping on chai tea outside of school..I feel sophisticated. #content” 
If you ask me where my own home is the only answer I can give is that its not a place but words I live in words and words are where I belong
The things i would do to him... Yum
we are 2ways and people will notice us. Eventually
Wow, wasn't Florida considered the leader by a lot of folks at one point?
What a game!!! “: Buzzer. Beater. #uwm #gopanthers”
Actor's Intensive Workshops Begin in October! 5 Week Technique Class: LA Oct. 12 – Nov. 9 Audition/Cold Reading Workshop: SF Oct. 16 & 17
is AH-MAZE-ING. see her in concert... I'm a HUGE fan now. So talented!
Ouu I'm so mad! Today sucks major monkey ball so far...
Well my shirt is on it's way, yes! time for a change!!!
i be there soon. Lets keep the numbers high
Aw, gee, thanks!
said you could provide insight into using iPads 1:1 in math and sciences. At 1:1 middle school in MD. Love to chat!
yup! Just be listening!
These feelings are meant to stay,
NWST: #Mariners Fan Fest Tickets up for grabs tonight. Tune in for Trivia question at 9:30 on plus in depth w/ Olympian Sasha Cohen.
Happy easter everyone! (:
oh they bout to find out!
hold up you're in portland, mind coming to my house?
With Azra at Sake House! We just ordered Baby Ocotopus and Spicy Scallops this should be interesting
did not enjoy meeting Newt Gingrich.
I suppose I'll go to bed then.
That, sir, is why you make the big bucks. A day at HQ for our 10,000th follower!
When told me he was loading up on the Cards +9 today I told him I'll take half. I love Louisville so much, I bleed red.
Well, a tuxedo cat is certainly a special creature, after all!
God this weather sucks. So just want to be home relaxing
Whoa! car Fire SB I-95 approaching I-895 south of Baltimore - two lefts blocked
definitely yeah! Its my fave show! You guys have to come back for another season!
bm bm bm. not sure how to spell out the NBC Rainbow sound at the end of the commercial. that will have to suffice.
i kno this gurl better follow me back, lmao
"it may on occasion be the duty of government to protect the individual against organized groups.”
Hey Arnold! >>
it would mean soo much if you would follow me .... your my idol!
haha, must have saw something, two potential first rounders isn't worth it....
Watch out facebook your next lmao
at linode.com. great company.
Hi, Ms. Sonnack. Are you currently looking for picture books? Thanks!
just this week and next week. i can do this.
so stoked you have no clue
same here 😄
Wondering when I should get the swamp cooler going for the summer season.
can we interview you, , , and on wednesday at the wallingford CT show 8/3 ? 362
Keep Tooting.
Landfills, sad
i was talking too Shaune yesterday bro.. We need too bang out a song playa! The industry needs our talent asap!
Seniors last day today! #bittersweet wish I was there! See you all at senior banquet though!
This love has taken it's toll on me, she said goodbye to many times before.
I still have two more days off then back to work
You're welcome!
RT : Someone working in a Nike factory in Vietnam makes 3 cents per hour, Warren Buffet makes $1.57 million per hour.
Let's Go Devils!!!! Game 1: Game time is coming up quick! LET'S GO DEVILS! #njdevils #NYRNJD”
"There's no such things as friends" My Aunts a trip
well,u dnt know shit ive gone thru nor go thru, and i dnt expect u to, im jus lettin ppl understand "me". im tryna stay real
#ThinkLikeAMan was the SHIT!!!! Kevin Hart at his best
I gave you my twitter at the radio staion and you still haven't followed me!. )':
I say fuck bitches and then I fuck bitches and after I fuck bitches I be like yo fuck bitches lol
Rise and Shine! Heading to the hospital for some pre-chemo stuff for Gram, hopefully all goes well.
Meeting adjourned - questions can be submitted to this hashtag any time.
Arias has a "forearm contusion" and x-rays came back negative.
I love that someone just pulled a Mortal Kombat reference!
bout to skype my new boo, never chase, just replace
Wake up call @ 630 am. Can't wait to hear your voice 😘😍. Goodnight!!
#IfWeedWereLegal gee whiz
HIV Drug Tenofovir Safe During Pregnancy, Study Suggests
New CBC Lineup Same as The Old CBC Lineup - The Mark
Hydrating like a son-of-a-gun before Melissa's bday soiree. Probably not good that I sweat out white stuff earlier!
Diagnosed with a tear in my left hammy. First day of rehab. Feel like I got NYK syndrome. Get well , , and
Mark Pinsky (Gospel According to the Simpsons) is deconstructing blogging and the blogosphere
Who's going to be crowned the next ? Place your bets!
Last day of work before my little brother ties the knot! I get a 4-day weekend, 4 parties, 2 shows, 2 new dresses and a sister.
I am a HUGE fan of the text messages that people send me saying, "call me" or "check your email". </sarcasm>
Congrats to the men's hockey team. #NCAA Div 1 National Champions.
Excellent cuppa Rte 66 blend at Misha's in Old Town.
If you have a popular blog, you prob don't have a problem recruiting Has anyone ever done a blog post for job openings?
by we you mean mainly carl crawford, right? The only one 0 for 6 at the end of the night
Discounts on amazing products just for being apart of Idaho! www.dell.com/idaho
Working late hrs like I do leads me to naturally feel lonely. wish I can win this mega million on tuseday to end this. Mr. Lonely s.o.s lol
Anyone wanna go to Nashville with me this summer for the CMA Music Festival?
thank you sis!! I appreciate you for praying and encouraging me!! God is good :) He made this happen yay
Hard hitting golf analysis from : "Phil Mickelson always plays better when his hair is long."
the one on pitt's campus at the Pete
work is just wearing me out
Counting down until the #SheenRoast tonight. I wonder if he gets that he's not IN on the joke, but the butt of them! I can't wait...
Sunday is to chill n relax.
EC twins tonight
#aurora borealis wondering if we'll get a light show tonight.
I see you often and you've never said a word to me, but you wanna be my friend on Facebook? I'll add you when you speak.
Hope everyones having a fantastic Memorial Day Weekend!(:
Finally home after some amazing days in London!! Truly extremely amazing and I love every single one of my sweet friends I shared it w/! <33
Ashton kutcher- a job well done !!
I got hired haha
You will keep your job & retire from there..
Pretty warm out here #dry heat
YES brunch and most romantic! RT : HEY did I see on that you have the brunch MOJO?
No offense taken! It's something we think about. But the ENP was a lifechanger for me at 25, so we wanted to give...
Since when is it cute to announce that you're horny?
And so it was told about storybook romancing & engaging Industry Moguls, Businesses, global Communities in "Real-Time".
Every clue starts with the letter B in today's crossword. It only took me 3/4 of a completed puzzle to notice.
Facebook + Tumblr + Twitter + YouTube = Reasons why my homework isn't done.
I can't wait to see is going to do. He's going to be a great one!
so i could say Happy b-day
Room service is the best
that would be my guess (at least indirectly - e.g., "that X is downright wicked")
Hey I just met you and this is crazy but here's my number so call me maybe
Dam niggas are so disrespectful to girls now adays.....girls deserve to be treated like princesses not prizes that is won!
I'm doing great bro! Hbuuuu
5 Questions to Ask when Determining the Location of Your Server ...
We always appreciate the RT's! Thank you.
Denver friends, anyone looking for a GREAT condo? Ours is on the market. We loved living there - we just needed space for studio & workshop.
looks good!
Don't forget: like most gov't facilities the Conservatory will be closed Mon, Sept 5 but the Sunken Gardens will be open 1-9pm.
After months of waiting, it's finally here. Prospecto Musical Showcase & Sonic Experience starts tonight and runs all weekend.
thanks Tashana that means a lot ! Love u too! I'm so proud of u!!!
Just heard the WORST concert spot EVER
My teacher definitely just said "do do" and I was the only one that laughed...
hm... if yall watching it might be be something I might enjoy, Aud's whats the verdict so far?
ESPN to Broadcast Two Live World Series of Poker Events in 2012
worth the money. Stay for two sets of credits for two extra scenes if you go.
Bride of Frankenstein
yeahh lololol I'm watching punk'd right now lololol they're pranking Ronnie from jersey shore right now hahahaha
- what I lack in knowledge, I make up in style! And we got it done! My job was to sell it...not build it!
Who caught 's "Letting Go?" review in latest ? Fabulous review of #Wikipedia as shared authority.
me either, we better get on that!
I'm tryin to get a hold of Kirby!! How bad does it need touched up bro? It was pretty vibrant last time I saw it..
A gourmet who thinks of calories is like a tart who looks at her watch. ~James Beard
. agreed. thanks #plonekonf organizers!
we're getting crunk in boystown, how abt u?
and your in michigan. gotta support anything thats in the mitten (usually)
Your description of Decorah's location made me laugh out loud. It's spot on.
Everyday my circle gets tighter and tighter
About to go to the tatto parlor with and ✌
no, twitter changed last week.. get with the program
Prepping new Scalar build for weekend release!
check out the lastest mix...you will miss miami more!
Ooh. Going on the list.
Listening to Mistletoe in May with #RealBelieberStatus right there.
updated my website and drinking starbucks coffee...yum www.michaelcalixtro.com
Im about to throw my phone in the pool -____-
you know when a graffiti writer says, man rough night. sometimes he aint talkin about drinkin
Hearing a few teams have inquired about the #Ravens pick in the 4th round. They're scheduled to pick 3rd today.
Change "I could" to "I can"
Worked with AECP programs in California and New York this past week - uplifting to see the progress throughout the USA for AE students!
Does anyone have any thoughts about investing in residential properties in the Detroit area? (not the ghetto areas)
that would hurt my feelings but I already forgot what you saud
Can't stop too many wanna see me make it there
Lukewarm Christianity is over...
Lend me your tired, your poor – and we will let them die, if they have no health insurance.
im happy for you!
LA continues to have high pollen count. I'm finding that a day started with a neti pot is a better day. Thanks
all this after I never said that I knew all stats for the team I'm a fan of Yet I do see rings, banners, etc
in Milwaukee Wisconsin. Tell Caine hello from the Midwest.
Just 3 "likes" away from 100...share More Skees Please with your friends and family today!
Brunette: "Look a dead bird!" Blonde: *Looks up* Where!?"
I feel so important cuz is following me.
In audience at showcase of amateur singer/songwriters. Need mute button.
Well, next year I'll be able to celebrate cinco de mayo
i almost got caught yesterday! :o
I love you (:
sure is. can't i just put "i'm awesome." and leave it at that??
The Jungle Cruise!
well in 2003 some of us would have been 13.
Cute conjoined twin animals seem to be really big on etsy right now
I wish I was waiting on one last load! I've run out of closet space & hangers so I can't finish!
OH those base on balls !!!!!
Cool, my Total Wealth Coaching Facebook Fan Page is linked to my Twitter. I don't even remember how I did that!
I am so tired of hearing "poor Shane Doan", "Shane Doan deserves a cup" "Shane Doan never does anything wrong" from these analysts
didn't miss much I meant. Stupid auto correct.
RT Promising last 72 hours for
they don't know and more importantly, they don't care.
wearing my moms gilly hicks sweater shh!
I'm posted foo. Got me some Chinese food. Bout to make some beats
We are good getting ready to shoot a video in Monday for our new song "Feel So Good" EXCITED :D
tony ever hang with a guy named big frank at desmonds in nyc? He worked at pemier years ago by les halles? Thx
Sure thing! I'll DM you her # ;)
Following ya Goldie!! :) *Hugs*
"Keep your fears to yourself, but share your courage with others." Robert Louis Stevenson really like this one. enjoy
you're my favorite mistake.
“The Iron Lady also won for makeup for Mark Coulier and J
Couple with extreme PDA on the el. Come on, this isn't Risky Business...
Aj Green 4 gm susp! If NCAA wants kids to be forthcoming then don't crucify them when they make mistakes..2 gms was good
Dude. This morning is insane
Work is the best. Can't get enough of it. I wish I was working right now.
So, I missed all the Aussie action last night.
Be a facilitator of learning.
lol only if u want it to b :)
We had such a great time with you in Nashville. Thanks for coming down & for being so awesome!
Ask us about our Spring Embroidered Hat Specials, 48 piece min. up to 10,000 stitches, includes set-up $5.98 ea 13 Styles to choose from!
fix your shoe lace.
Not really fitness related, but who's watching the Ringer season finale tonight?
yes I'm getting your tweeds. How's the conditions?
Working Harder than the next man so the next man can't take my place!
awww now i seem like a mega bitch. are you ok?
bros before hoes, but you know lil bros before big bros.
Mom was airlifted to chicago.. Emergency surgery..possible anurism. please keep her in your prayers.
Aint Talked To Eric Sense 12 Time To Get The CUTTING!
Had a great time photographing with at Thanks!
wish I could!
i freaking love interviewing & Jayy hating on Bryan :) im like jayy sometimes
I found you! :) great audition on friday!!! our class is amazing!!!!
I told you so, but you had to go. Now I've found somebody new and you will never break my heart in two again.
S/O to my new followers
Afl-cio's Liz Shuler talking to 900 Univ of Il students about the labor movement and workers
there's a media event going on for United Latino Pride, the weeklong Latino LGBT event in Chicago.
Im back on twitter, holla at ya boy! ;-)
Working at Uncle D's NY pizza in feels like I'm in a joint.
2NITE All MOTORCYCLE/BIKE Crews are FREE @ Trinity River Sports Cafe (5214 S. Lamar St.-Dallas)!! FREE PARKING!! Also CD Rlease for "C-THRU"
ALAN CARUBA: AFGHANISTAN THE DEFINITION OF MADNESS ...
you are, my side :)
Another productive day. A big thanks to for helping me get my act together!
Yeah ! I sent you what they said!
welcoming on board Michael Mccraw who will represent Alabama
Have people gone totally nuts?
I still have a beard.
you spelled my name with one t
-Started listening @ work. Great mix, we're diggin' it!
Our jobs are for the people here. They have their own country, go sell drugs south of the border.
Tell your friends/family u r on the #jobhunt – you will get a lot of leads starting with your immediate #network. via
So back he goes. The plan was to put him back for elementary anyway, so doing kinder someplace else doesn't make sense.
Omw to this job fair at acs
#ReasonsWhyTheCrimeRateGoUp because there's more doughnuts in the world then people and a brotha has to eat
Lol. You and your friends offer to murder me, and you're going to complain?
I know. Or Lambeau on a football Sunday w/75k trying to use their smartphones.
Why did you score Obama?
whats your email?
Just saw my commercial on the Disney XD channel! Pretty cool!
No WaY i LoOk ExAcTly ThE sAmE wAy :O
Is the next ? It certainly is if you're looking to hit the 14-24 y.o. demographic, especially in Europe.
really? # day has been made
Feel like beating something up while Drive Like Jehu blasts today. Rome Plows!
wholeheartedlyy Apple's sending out 1,000 iPad 2's for a fantastic promotion, go to this page for details! ipad_3_giveaway
Baby carrots are fresh and sweet and delicious. But Butterfinger Blizzards are better.
Defending WBU belt Sat Feb 11 2012 at Patriot Center (opponent TBD).. looking forward to another great night... appreciate your support
Pretty sure i failed the csn final
I braid my hair and it comes out even straighter than before once I take it out .-.
gym or laundry? why is the world full of unbearable choices?
Hello American?
someone should make a cover for a Pierce The Veil or Sleeping With Sirens song c:
So lovely... the sun is shining on my porch. I'm starving... it just might a night to play hookey from table tennis... just maybe...
Don't let me get in my zone!
Booked a long weekend of camping in Yosemite for our 7th wedding anniversary. Couldn't be more excited.
Really wanna just go home and be by myself
#ThingsiWantTheMost is for everyone to go follow my boy :)
Mason also reminded us to find things to be memorable, learn from the conversations you're having.
Me and my auxillary office........
": Larry Flynt just said "Having sex with a condom on is like jerking off with a glove. Who does that?" No me
In neighboring district, no teams stalled & teams thrived. Their teams became stronger & kids were recruited.
RT : Lisa Valentino: Take your Money out of AdNetworks. Most of them will be gone in 12 month.
Suck my snake, AZ
How #scottwalker in #Wisconsin take the #boxers off #publicemployee #unions & gaveem #panties? Talk about
Bad experience at your Spring Hill, TN store today. Multiple examples of poor service and completely disappointed.
I need to be hookin up with more latino chicks.
LinkedIn: "Your headline should say who you are without reading your profile." -
yea but their performance levels were not as high as theirs :/ but I seriously don't want none of them to go home :(
hahaha oh geez
"The boss does not get to tell us whether or not we are a union." -Sukari Pinnock-Fitts TSA (Are you listening ?)
Looking for something to do tonight? Watch the next three tweets!
oh yes :) you little cute thang!!
If you ever wanted to build/nurture/shape experience design in your org, join 's workshop: Experience Design Practice Development
im a fan of redeveloping east liberty, and quite amazed at how successful it is, but call it what it is...,
How old are you before it can be said you died of old age?
Basketball Season Needs To Come A Little Faster !
Fact is he was so underrated but all he did was make plays smh and I agree if he played in superbowl 41 Rex Grossman has a ring lol
Come on out to Senior House on Feb 16th from 6:30pm to 8:30pm for refreshments & prizes to celebrate 's video launch!
Already changed
Tomorrow I'm visiting to put the final touches on the "Unsigned from Uptown" project before its ready for revisions & mastering.
Funny thing: neither did the Sox. Yesterday tied for the largest comeback in NYY history.
I forgot about your York endorsement deal.
did we keep the girl talk to a decent level? Lol
Also finally got that toilet fixed. Hopefully no more 400 dollar water bills.
After a break up yu might think I dnt care but I'm torn up on da inside,, but I will always keep my composure
Just April 19 in Charlottesville. But might be in Boston in April as well!!
Headed to #allhat ... Best event of SXSW
hahaha...they are in the Grove!
I need coffee kahlua brownie ice cream
Correction, its the WCC
> u r on bus one with me and hobbs. U still down for going?
According to scientists drinking one can of four loko is like drinking 4 beers, 2 red bulls, a small taco, and a park bench.
In kindergarten, lice was like the std lol
They definitely can help them. She has great credentials. She was part of OJ's defense team.
making cupcakes:')
Shows what a joke our political process has become. Thanks Citizens United!
Hunger Games Spoiler!!! Plot: The rich make the poor compete in games to stay alive. Ending: Poor defeat Mitt Romney, impose 70% tax rate.
Good luck to and reaching the final table of !
The amount of bullshit I've put up with today is unreal.
Get ready for summer break! Coming March 20th we are bringing you local CAMP deals!
#FlockaVoice O Let's Do It!
Playing crew love i got it on repeat.
I interviewed the woman about the mistake the would-be carjackers made. Also talked to those visiting officers who chased after the men.
Summer's approaching! Use our tool to set a weight loss goal and compare your actual progress with your projected progress! www.IamINC.biz
Happy St. Patrick's day! Come celebrate with us.. Patio is OPEN!!!
hi! when is your next show in spokane?
Its not hard to find someone who tells you they love you, its hard to find someone who actually means it ♥
How bout them ravens, signing , and Christian Thompson. Would love them to add OSI to take Suggs spot
Privacy is also trending, so maybe people are trying to be "private" today ;)
Option 2 is logical. You'd still hear them but not as loud as other players who have no perk.
This Miami vs New York is gonna be a good one
I really wanna go to the movies tonight. 🎬🎥
“For the LORD takes delight in his people; he crowns the humble with victory.” -Psalm 149:4 (NIV)
25 is still older than my age!
Drink a sixer of Mad Elf and get back to me.
Don't fake like you smoke when you don't or talk like you're rich when your broke
Maybe Grossi will put a chapter on Kokinis in his Children's book. "GM George drank lots of potion. Then he got angry!"
hey man get well soon youre my favorite player.
Most eventful part of my day: watching my mom lose her shit when we realized it was indeed a mouse running around our feet at home depot
It's cool. I'm really busy so its going to be a couple of weeks before I can get the verse to u. I'm in the middle of some promo.
No I hadn't yet. Good grief.
I'm so stressed out. Can't wait until tonight!
No one seems to care for it when I call them boss, especially my boss.
McCain earned my respect with his speech tonight. Best he's done yet. Congrats President Obama!
ring a famous YouTuber and act as if you are breaking up with them :)
creating a gigantic clam shell box for CA photographer Sol Hill. Big enough to sleep in!
We just saw a dog that looked like Jack Franklin. Just wanted you to know.
What kind of suggestions? I am seeing an acupuncturist next week. What should I be prepared for?
Miami Heat. They was two games away from a ring and they can't wait to get back on the court against the Mavs
aww....... I knew u would put a pic up
I'm on cloud 9.. With the sims 3.. Dan got it for me! Beast brother in law ever.. Gonna have to think of a way to thank him
i am doing really well:) you marissa and i should hang out before i leave
leave work now I wanna play
Nicole Kidman back to Zac Efron and blonde hair too on set of The Paperboy - Daily Mail
u know your just 💩 lmaoo jk ur the the 💩
"your too sweet you don't need any candy" - lita
mine would be Eli
Hows everyone doing to day?
Or am im just a fresh rare ass nigga.......
waking up at 3am with a migraine makes morning research paper productivity virtually zilch. ugh.
Happy opening day, !! Best of luck this season!
#HOWLive is NEXT MONTH! So excited!
She'll come around. They always do.
I had a dream lastnight. made $15,008. And this is the whole truth, and nothing but the truth.
All I really learned from this movie is that field hockey scholarships bring out some seriously cutthroat competition.
k CS pica!!
LET'S TREND
One lone UK fan in the UL student section. LOL
Busy day today. Class....Apple Store...... Discount tire..... All thia b4 3:30. :)
Your welcome!!!
Heard the only tx for #ATX left are at stubhub. Win some in the next 15 minutes by listening to !
Lol so the Lakers lose by 30 and Kobe get a pass. Heat lose by 3 and wade missing lay ups....look at the LeBron hate.
Happy #FF to my newest followers!!
um.. well LETS DO IT THEN! (;
"Two week rule"...does absence really make the heart grow fonder?
I dare you to move.
yeah no one likes sleep....but even less people like meth heads lol
we'll be back!
Woot woot pens win 8th game in a row! :D
angeles convention center and #herworld helping girls realize their dreams today.
ugh gotta fuckin fever bro
I'm running out of words to say to you, wondering why i'm wasting my time..
I'm sure it will and definitely "Best Supporting Actor Canine"
You could have a fistful of brew by at Tap Haven... but only if you register!
ABD would be awesome! I would love to do one of the European tours!
Thank you Miami and Carnaval on the Mile...we had a great time this year...and looking forward to next year!
Today was the last day to register for spring semester internship for credit (classes). It's not too early to apply for summer and fall :)
what comes before part b? PARTAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA! be here at a 11 to get your party on people! its gonna be da bomb
"A willing helper does not wait until he is asked."
New levels in Angry Birds Seasons! Huzzah!
is that all u can tweet bout?
thank you for the door to door service much appreciated
lol , a little bit . it wont take me long to master it though . probably like a week or so .
Just leaving the #OrganDonorAwarenessSeminar at #GalileeBaptistChurch in
‎I love photos,Because they never change,even when people in them change.
That's cool!
So apparentlly I'm subtweeting ..first of all anything that I've said has nothing to do with dat situation ...so yea your CAUGHT
Wow can u say hello massive snow storm buffalo...ah land of the ice and snow...writing
Nice to see my old windy city.
I know what you meant! :D
Stuck in Denver one more time. Thanks United.
#FF Style resources that rock -
This is the best feeling in the world, hearing music so great u r so inspired u dont know where to start! I'm like a kid in a candy store!
Thanks to for a great day yesterday, we are truly excited about your response!
One answer: ask what is spirit of current international laws and how do we update it for 21st century? Not easy; take cyber warfare.
wanna hear the good news? Your plastic gift card works here on Benson
FEED ME OMFG.
haha don't hate!!!
ooh that's rough!!! Don't think I could go too long without my phone
I continually find myself drawn to inst. design & prof. dev. Wish there were more opportunities at my school for me to practice them.
good! trying to get into the holiday spirit & you?
RT : RT Life is like a game of cards…*
Can you bring a guest? :-D
Weird when FB suggests Rich Sommer to be my friend. I guess im greeting to know the right people, eh? He is very nice btw.
spoken like a true non-parent
25 minutes of editing another's work just did more to clear my head than I can imagine. Props to my little sis!
Hehehe goodnight gonna go on a date with a beautiful Undie :)
So how is everyone's life changing because the Dow Industrials hit the 13,000 level for the first time since May of 2008?
Lookin to find wats next for me but grindin is goin to b a major part
haha duh silly. I figured Madison was way closer than West Lafayette
Great piece in Forbes on energy & buildings.Can u DM me an email address? Would love to pitch you on an idea.
Forgive, son; men are men; they needs must err
RT ~ To be yourself in a world that is constantly trying to make you something else is the greatest accomplishment.
lololo, I do too(: And then I prolly can't stop laughing.
Sociology final, over and done with. We'll let your Chem, Anthro, and SciFi finals know you're coming for them.
You're annoying (:
Thanks Kati! I hope that you have a great weekend!
A stitch in time would have confused Einstein.
Great book talk today Thanks to everyone who came!
I am the UFO United funk official Commanding you to bust a move Or suffer with my missile
Happy Tweetings to you too K-Marie!!!
Cheese ravioli and salad and bread sticks at olive garden before a long day at work
Gardening is the only time I'd let a leaf tickle my face. :)
Gack!! The #ASTD2012 app on my iPad has no idea who I am and no record of my selected schedule?!?!?!
only a few more weeks sweethaht
ru using Jobu's rum again ;)
Hey, it wasn't rainbows or unicorns. Lol
Thank you, , for the Shambala recommendation.
I have 3 FREE tickets to the NM Bowl! Any takers??
is the hardest worker I know, always up late studying #straightA's
I want everybody to hear loud and clear that I'm going to be the president of everybody.
Thank you all who participated in the annual Mothers Day Botox party. It was a great success.
Be empty of worrying. Think of who created thought
pandora is crazy good right now!
Happy Law Day! The legal system may well suck where you are, but it's worse most other places in the world.
Looking for male vocalist, contact only if serious
Girl: “I love Cody Simpson." Me: “I love Jake, Josh, Campbell, Alli, Brad, Matt & Angie too!” Girl: “Who are they?” Me: “GET OUT OF HERE!”
Are libraries obsolete? Nah. They're just changing. That title was misleading and the panel kinda stacked
2013/2014 "new new" "im jiggin im fresh" by 500Boyz Watch out for the New Video!!!!!!!!! TEAM F.B.E.
truer words haven't been spoken
Wow, I've reached 3,000 #followers! THANK YOU!
Dang it. They arent breaking up
Mw3 live .! Someone wanna play me and my sister ? (: Or basketball live ?
I mean I wasn't gonna lie... So ready for all those kids to be freshman!
Lmao... chicken n veggies!
Quitter. Doubter.
Runways are back open now. Hopefully you we be back on your way soon.
swear I miss my sis even though she be gettin on my last nerves... #LoveTweet/MissedTweet
Check online at www.dell.de/streak :-)
#teamfollowback where u at FOLLOW ME plz
Train hard -- stay motivated!
Cone on MKE...give us weather like this ALL week so we can train hard this week!
Greatest gift: giving kids the will to read. Ross Todd
So many little things that need to be accomplished. I wish they were all cute little square photos I could look at then toss in the done box
I got u mama #fb ": #FollowBack"
I miss him already and its only been 12 hours *** sighs deeply *** *christina the cuban*
I just had a mini spaz attack on the bus because #solisten came on!! :))
Rico in for Shep this AM. 248.848.1130 - Which local team wins a championship first? Wings? Tigers? Lions? Michigan/Michigan State?
I completely agree. Its hard to assess organic serp order for clients too
Workout also done!
#MoMo means "Happy Lucky Life" RT if you live a "Happy Lucky Life"
no problem!
In my head I imagine Kodak tower looks like the set of Madmen only empty?
Alrighty. I love you too, handsome. :)
Menstruation, menopause, mental breakdowns…Ever notice how all women’s problems begin with men?
maybe it is time we follow each other -
🍸🍸: Pessimist: "Aww my glass is empty" - Optimist: "Aww my glass is half full" - Me: "Yay, room for more vodka!"”
Oh snap!
Rt if u will always support Selena Maria Gomez
Hi Noah, please follow back!! :)
A 2011 Scientific Research study by ETScience LLC proves my Dip-N-Rip-Sticks Tackling Technique lowers helmet first impact by 43%.
that's ok man ! There's plenty of girls who would kill to be with you right now! Wish I was that lucky
OK, I've shared my favorite styles with the world. Let me know what you think!
the first one... It has vanilla ice in it lmao
Yes!, I'm a warrior poet, and I will win my freedom no matter what the cost!!!
the marketing campaign I'm working on it so creative and visually stunning--and it could possibly kill me.
#ClubPS3 #ClubiPad2 It's almost that time!
Guess what I bought at Mazzola Bakery on the way home...
Thanks for the quick reply! We're uber-poor right now...willing to do something pro-bono?
TriMet: MAX tracks are now clear at Lloyd Ctr, and full service is returning to "regular frequency"
as of this week, we have two new community network uplinks in my neighborhood! thanks hostel and spaulding court!
I LOVE those books.
yes!!! When are you getting your ticket?
Happy hump day folks! Enjoy it with some freshly tapped brews, like 's "Admiral" Stache and Weekend at Louie's for your enjoyment!
omg Loren just breathe! It'll all be okay act normal! You will do great I promise<3 I have faith in you!
how you been?
who the hell is Tom Palmer, and when did he mix our album? I'm board (sic) with this review.
Patty Mills has 6 points. The Spurs lead the Suns 23-20 with 2:27 left in the first quarter.
Music is around the corner. I also have a new over version of Adele "Someone like you" And new videos are coming soon! Stay tuned!!
Dancing with >>>
Two speciality cocktails tonight - Classic Champagne (Cham, sugar, bitters, lemon) & Creamsicle (vodka, Licor 43, Orange, Cream)!
you know how to get to the ave
Time machine, take me to The Crumperie on Christopher Street in Greenwich Village, 1920. I'm having crumpets & tea with Christopher Morley.
It was great! “: ! Can't wait to learn from Rep. & ICE Director John Morton at the Copyright of Way panel.”
Thank you for sharing the website. Enjoy your week!
Clippers have to make those EASY shots. Spurs methodically keep their offense running with jumpers. Gotta close out better.
Which reminds me.. hey are you or did fill out a NCAA tournament bracket sheet?
#DYK By using a ceiling fan w/ the air conditioner, you could save 4-8% on your bill for each degree you raise the thermostat.
is the way to go!!
I been about a dollar like 99 cent
RT " When given the choice between desserts order all of them!"....nice :-)
The day I turn 18, it's goin down
Rest in peace Ben Koier, such an amazing person. You always taught me to live life to the fullest and stay true to me. Love you bud.
HAHAHAHA. *loses mind*
CANDIDATES, the FREE review will be discontinued at the end of this month:
I want pics! RT : My dad got his first tattoo last week, and got his second two days later. Both on his neck. What a bad ass.
Don't complain about grading 100 essays over the weekend. You assigned them.
Making cookies for tonight's stitch-n-bitch. Step 1: open box of frozen dough...
it aint funny unless it has a big veiny pecker in it
Can't wait to see my man on Desperate Housewives tonight! Yuuuummmmmyyyyy!
I can't get over this video
Donald has time to demo his new expanded cribbage game -- it's both complex and fun at the same time -- what a terrific inventor he is.
It hard given up the preson you love the most it even harder not talk'n to the preson you love the most
*sigh* feel like I just missed best advice on the #Awarenessinc webinar because (SURPRISE!) 11 minutes were up and there was an interruption
Good morning
Yes Im In Chicago, ILL....
ok.. it's time for a new book/series suggestion.. help? loved Hunger Games, True Blood series, cop-type mysteries, romantic thrillers, etc..
New TIME Magazine cover story: The New Frugality. That should be interesting.
Thanks for NOT inviting me to my own birthday lunch
hunger is taking over
formfactors for SSDs are probably driven more by Bladeservers Tom/Nimbus data
Why be someone ur not??!
Do you think this will lead to a Antitrust Lawsuit? How Soon Until Apple Blocks Walmart’s Vudu Video Magic? | SiliconANGLE...
Lol...(yea, i'm like 4hrs late replying,,,phone jacked up lmao)
": samples samples samples"
really? do we get to eat it at the show?
hi sweetie! can u check josh's page and let me know if you can c the graphic ok... i made his the same size as urs ;)
I say fuck it all.
Inspired by to start a tshirt riot. Who's in?
Aw! Thank you DevN1kes for the luv...... :-)
Last Call Realization: I celebrate St. Drunken's Day in my heart every day.
Thanks, ZippyG. "We are GO for Auto-Sequence Start."
Diana Ross has NEVER won a Grammy?????
Excited that is now following me back! Looking forward to the opener, and this season. Going to be a great summer in Reno!
Beauty call LA - Cryostem facial increase collagen 71% in 1 treatment.Your Beauty all the time.
Tax return complete = new iphone on order. Happy birthday to me . . . Thanks uncle Sam for raping me throughout the year. -_-
says strip clubs and sex shops are not welcome in P-town.
word!! And what you have to offer... Lol
It is now up to to move forward and show the leadership it has always shown. Time for us old timers to step up
Four Seasons Resort Vail announces new team members
Work hard, dont stop, think about it, just keep doin what you do best....
Lol No problem! I started to ask Sean's middle name but I thought better of it... (It MUST be awful, Percy or sumthin)
I think I've figured out this #bliss thing that #hippies talk about: waking up totally not hungover after drinking all night. Am I right?
Resigned as Treasurer of the Rochester ISSA - freeing up my Volunteer energies for new exciting causes and ideas! Look out!
OMG! finally I'm ungrounded! Im so Happy!!! :D
If they have open house b4 school starts,take him to see his room & meet the teacher. Once he gets into the routine, he'll be fine.
I've layered sweaters that don't match. It's okay. I'm a writer, I'm allowed to be eccentric.
Wow...Stunning! A great place to be.
Thanks for sharing your feedback. We'll be following up to ensure that that's not happening!
you can hang out with me ):
follow the real
This humidity can go away ANYTIME now!
There's a truth behind every lie.
yes ma'am.
thanks we need it! Amie hurt her thumb! Wiki hurt her knee! (Someone stood on her knee!^) hah abiee also hurt her thumb!
Yayyyyyyyy! I finished my language are speech! Lol yayyyyy! No I have to go shower and get ready 4 bed!! Bo!/: lol I hate wakin up early
I used to have hella bad anger problems,but now I know how to control them.BUT,if you get me hella pissed ITS ALL BAD FOR YOU!!
Aw, thanks. You're fabulous!
I went to a convent school—for a few months. It didn't take, to put it mildly.
Fun night tonight 👍❤😁🎱
RT: Love the smell of opening a new box of swisha sweets grape!
When you not around yo' crew you a whole new person! SMH
Above all try something::::::: Franklin Delano Rosevelt
Now we on rush and division and rush street...feeling good feeling great
#tiip4p Business Acumen sim, bought off the shelf & if emp can't make the relation, they have wrong leaders running the biz
Thank you! We're looking forward to it as well!
RIP #BenGazzara. Very Talented actor. He'll be missed.
I agree!
[Viral Tip ] Use a video distribution service like TubeMogul to upload your video content to many sites.
Plus my #naturalhair is at that weird not short/not long stage. Past my shoulders, but not at my bra strap.
congratulations on your new website. It is beautiful!
Sun + temporary tattoo left a brand on the back of my neck. Coworkers pointed it out to me today. SO CLASSY.
Turn on my old phone and theres all our old convos :)
RT : Isn't it about time for us to find out all hand sanitizers cause cancer?#it'scoming
I wonder if my mom knows how to text
Headed for to check out !!
Can't wait to visit on Thursday to try out their new vegan options!
You make the baby Allah cry.
MAY THE GOOD LORD BLESS YOUR SOUL DORIS! LOL HALLELUJAH HOLLABACK!!!
t-minus 29 minutes until BFA defense...
right on for takin my roach fag lol
Same here...that was unnerving to say the least. RT EARTHQUAKE! MY HOUSE IS SHAKING!
band member Nash Overstreet is the brother of Chord Overstreet on There father is country singer Paul Overstreet
Finally back in twitter. Took a sabbatical from it for a while.
: Thanks Matt!
So did we ;) haha
Watched a Frontier plane land from my new job.
It was the first of many times I will watch over next 2 weeks! RT : 1:22 left in SB 42 on What a crazy 4th quarter
haha :) anytime hun! It's not so often you visit us here at ! Glad we could make it happen!
Hahaha! Holy fuck. Did you ask her if they're doing anal for date #2?
Deciding whether or not if I should re-pierce my nose..
Boys I'm horny and need to chat!!!
these are used and were cheap! Now outrageously overpriced. :/
you make me LMAO! Thanks :)
RT : Celebrate #SBW2012 with Get Down to Business: a free, action-packed, nationwide series of business building events!
I'm back and it feels good, minus the fact I can't sleep
Hi Mikey 💙
ugh so lucky :(
RISE OF THE PLANETS was @ the state fair park midway n milwaukee on thurs,dont know how 2 act
watz good doe
thanks to YOU maam :D
Wow Johnny is a bitch
Just got home and logged on. Looks like our girl broke a big orioles story today and a local web gal got a lil jealous and huffy. Jen rules
sounds nice!
tues phone call? dm me your digits
Ugh! Danng this sucks :( #Dodgers lose 3-4 against the #Cubs. #Dodgers are now 18-10 in the season
#FF Happy Friday for yall Food Lovers!
Commit to the Lord whatever you do, and your plans will succeed. -Proverbs 16:3
"When we do more than we are paid to do, eventually we will be paid more for what we do."
34. #Cubs 8 #Brewers 2 | Brew Crew cannot sweep / The Cubs leave town with one win. / Our cellar partners.
this nigga going get us into a fucking accident. Stupid ass.
Stop the Ban strongly encourages registering to vote and voting in local elections! We also encourage you follow !
Oscar nominee David Strathairn will join Oscar nominee Jessica Chastain in this fall's revival of THE HEIRESS!
Im never gonna be as slow as my mom
looks interesting let me know if you find something you like
Awesome. Do you have anything for Baton Rouge?
Honored to be at 's Annual Conference, celebrating 27 million alumni of Head Start!
Have to own up! I'm watching Downtown Abbey.
All is well. We moved to atlanta last summer and we're enjoying the city. Working on a new ms. How are things with you?
HOW IS EVERYONE'S DA GOING???:):):)
I don't care what the nutrition label says, Top Ramen noodles are DELICIOUS.
Follow me please!!:)
Is it me or does Toby Anstis sound like a gay
okay I'll be outside warren at 11
must b e a heck of a problem unless you had too much #rockstar tonite
I told you guys you could come over!
not sure ... It came outta nowhere. :-)
I stay on it...
o that sounds like so much fun!
'FT will start offering top advertisers access to reader data' -- Privacy concerns, yes, but eventually this will just be how it's done
I see the makings of an "opinion post" or us four on a ToolBar episode. ;)
4 kids, 400 miles. Great weekend camping, but time for rest
is really craving captin crunch berries and i dont have any :|
Brad Porter is wearing his dad's jacket during post-game.
depends on the details, really. and the lawyer he'd be able to hire would bargain it down, surely.
New Glarus on sale! Yeeeessssss *napolean dynamite fist-pump*
S/O to my newest follower
Is anyone else having a problem adding new products to ?
Simons reaction was right, she deff deserved to stay, best voice and way better than Marcus!
Timbaland no contest.
Happy leap day!
It seems like the person who loves the least is always the one who controls the relationship.
but life and living is complex- get with the picture.
There's this senior in my school who has sex and everybody knows it. SO gross.
georgia's weather is really crazy last night we had black ice and it got down to low 20's and today it got up to 50 and rained all day
you might not see this but...HAPPY BIRTHDAY!!:) #beliebers love u foreva and always!
We are open today from Noon to 10pm!
By nature single women will look for the best of the species to breed with. They are looking for potential mates.
We are always available
I think it goes without saying that Jamie Hyneman is the top
A cool mothers day gift if she is old school and needs a new phone. The Droid Razr 4G LTE at Verizon is awesome. good deal right now! -Bobby
Bobby Lee from MadTV? one of my favorites! The 24 skits were the best. I dont get a lot of APA actors to pick from to enjoy!
First job interview on Wednesday!
Tonight we are playing at Sambuca360 (7200 Bishop Road # 270 Plano, TX 75024) Come hang out! Be sure to grab an EP while you are out!
Toddler, licking marinara sauce off the spoon: "M...meatbally."
no good answers - observing? ethnography? it's not easy data to collect & something that should be addressed
Hopefully the time goes by fast.
There's not a single female waitress at this resturant
a real Hoosier never gives up.. And look who got a RT?? That's right me!!!
shouting out your click eh?
Expect the Unexpected!
Recommendations over the past few days: Tassili (4342 N Elston) for Algerian and Al Bawadi Grill (7216 W. 87th Street) for Palestinian
You'll never live a happy life if you always care about what others think about you.
Thinking about how I'm going to get to go to 's graduation party & how he's graduating next month
it's an art form :) have a great day!
Why didn't you say hey? .... Creeper RT “: Opted not to be a creeper as just walked by me”
yes I know lindsey...lacey tries to hard lol
tell me why I wake up to a chicken every morning? bahahah...
Andy's set was GREAT last night
but just know I'm still mad so I will be pissed at you by tomorrow!
Congrats to Cecily Scheinfeld. That is no small feat.
I hope you all are enjoying this wonderful weather we have had for the last 2 days. I know I am!
People rarely succeed unless they have fun in what they are doing. - Dale Carnegie
Great day of teaching Intro to GIS for Fire Service at the #Burlington Township Fire Academy.
Finally, nap time...please let traffic not be a bitch today!
Let me know if you can come catch THE SUGAR BEAN SISTERS at the Little Fish Theatre in San Pedro. Would love you to see the show!
Good margarita at Ceviche indoor bar. It's a whole half hour til dinner.,.
Uptown Browns Baseball squad steps up today with big 14-4 win over the Cubs. Great team effort.
So far, no poop but quite a bit of sass.
Brendan Rodgers has pied Liverpool saying "I'd only be looking to move to a bigger club" That's brilliant!! Great shout
Should I make a form spring
Oh u wanna man n u wont just let me fuck hold that thought as i become famous bet that'll change ur mind
This SBS migration is going terribly slow.
As we start to plan our cooking school, we want to know what you want! What cooking classes would you like to attend??
nice to see you again tonight at Opart Thai. Thanks again for speaking w/ members.
just finished the first chapter of Nicest Kids in Town about race and Am. bandstand! Excellent work Matt!
If I reach for your hand, will you hold it? If I hold out my arms, will you hug me?
I wish but I bet she doesn't even notice me -.-
you can if you want to but you only have to do one. It will count towards your 200 tweets though!
Shout out to the honorable Ondarwey Julian
We appreciate it Kim! Thanks so much!
NEW BAND DEBUT TONIGHT 10pm
Glad that Gigantic Brewing opened in deep SE - spread the wealth Beervana!
#YOLO is an excuse for skanks to be skanks.
Still this is a pretty hurtful article.
The RIG Region 7 AOS Panel is now taking a five minute break.
in less than 24 hours I'll be done 😁😁😁😁
working on it so I will be ready for the masters division when I turn 50
He wouldn't even go out in the yard!
Happy Monday!!! Hope everyone has a beautiful week!
Pet food commercials, you are getting out of control.
3 years working nights was enough for me. Avi Selk can handle.
Up early to do some educational outreach in Minneapolis this morning. The kids always give us energy!
i watched gavin's too. because im kinda of in love with him.
Just watched The Yearbooks "Season of Love" video on HDNet! Who's recording that shit?
Late night end of session and the joys that come with it. Good times.
#Duke going down to #Lehigh ...could be the 2nd number 2 team to go down in the first rd today
It can help you get more exposure. Also, get on youtube if you haven't already. Put your videos on youtube.
Stay tuned for the results of the 1st Early Bird Drawing!
lmao i do perfectly it's not thatt bad I think the actual back hurt me more than the skull I got right below the back of my neck .
is finalizing federal reports on homelessness to help local agencies access funding to
#WilDChildZ guess what........ talent show coming up and im really hype i wonder what song to sing anyone wanna give me songs???
Yoga outdoors was a good follow up to work.
Why can't it be Aaron. Dang.
Wow! Really appreciate this one.
aw i missed your tweet spree, what the fork ?!?! :(
Very cool. Please keep us abreast of the details (seriously)
Can we all vote for a statewide sick day the Monday after Super Bowl?
The tool in front of me is listening to 3 Doors Down. I remember 7th grade..
"Your intellect may be confused, but your emotions will never lie to you."
Look, man. You're 30. You're a big boy. Too big to ask a lady out on facebook. Oy gevalt.
I think it's because u are a libra
GOT MY YMCMB SWEATSHIRT!!! now we can match! love you.
it does for now, until my superhuman strength destroys it once more. will do =)
yep indeed. U?
will you wear a pretty jeans tomorrow and you are cute smile on your face i love it michelle
Any suggestions for Harlem happy hr? Help :)
I'm afraid I'm gonna miss it cause of graduation.. Oh nooos
Hahaha yes you are.
Wats up? Havent talked to you in a while..
I know I'm not perfect, but you're pretty fucked up too.
Love it RT : Just biked to work for the first time. All extremities accounted for. GREAT SUCCESS.
#IHate giving people the wrong impression
Just finished written Ph.D exams.
Thanks for the suggestion!
Hey hey DK! Keep filling out those Fall Floor Feedback Dorms! They really help. So far DKB1 has the most responses!
PARTY FUCKIN' TIME!
The Atman in you is the same as the supreme all-pervading Reality.
macaroons are delicious. Super jealous you are in paris
Brian Clay is at the coffee shop I'm at! Score!!!!
“: "I love you back."—President Obama” oh my gosh!!!! THE PREZ JUST TWEETED ME!
I googled how to hard boil eggs. Lol. I so don't cook.
#rbs11 uses evocative phrases for digital glunk hiding on your hard drives, such as: “Space junk” or “Fossilized fragments.”
I bought your sandlot shoes for my Dad as a b-day present. He was thrilled!!
Sorry 2 any1 who has been affected by the hacking of my "follower" & "following" list that hasnt been corrected &continues 2 b disregarded.
Another great day to get creative > feeling the colors! :)
CALL TODAY FOR A FREE ESTIMATE , EXOTIC COLLISION CENTER (339-224-3371) JOHN
Mt. Vernon today
i no u do
I have more followers than ha.
That's when he slipped haha
Like all dreamers, I mistook disenchantment for truth
long and tedious. :)
Craving a big glass of lemonade
Thank you!!! "HAPPY BIRTHDAY !!!"
I'm glad you enjoyed it Megan! I will be glad to assist you in the future! Have an awesome day.
everytime i open a pineapple it dissapoints me when i dnt see sponqebob
she went to valley. Graduated 01.
WHAT DO I GOTTA DO TO GET YOU TO FOLLOW ME?? :o)
Just saw and it was amazing. I had several moments of tears but what a great love story based on a real couple!
Bitch I'm, bitch I'm From Cleveland.
Wild berry lemonade from Wendy's is phenomenal
Even if you don't agree with your girlfriend about a certain issue, it is still important that she is being respected, heard and understood.
It is quite time consuming....
I hope that you are okay! I love you. And one day Brock dies...:) I know thats mean, but your my fav and that was not ok..:)
I miss Citlaly D;
Fell asleep with my work clothes on
It is embarrassing, how lucky Lawrie was to have Joe Torre giving out weak punishment. Good point.
": if I'm genuinely interested in what you have to say, you'll know it."
#musesocial good point - goes to the heart of how museums have to evolve
pre-reg at w/ Finals Saturday 11am. Winner goes to Aruba w/
;-) I've been telling people left and right. Gotta support our Portland peeps!
Was in Ireland a month last summer. Cold & rainy most of the time. Guinness & Carlsberg were still great so trip was a success.
aw miss my honeyxavier
Trip to NH, Lucy (my Mazda3) got 39mpg. Rated for 33 highway.
“I’m in a mood where I come all untied – I’m in a mood to say shit that’ll change people’s minds.” (Wakey!Wakey!)
we have SO many things on nearly EVERY topic you can imagine! Good luck on your finals!
That is true my friend
has a great suit on!
Yeah, but it sure takes a while to spell it all out :-)
People say that age is just a state of mind
And Lil Kim.
Who else is in boston for st patty's?!
Hearing that this bitch Siri has some serious snark. Bring it on, creepy AI. BRING. IT. ON.
but now it's a bigger joke! BJ's? Yea I could go for one! Lol
No good mornings mentions make me feel to say a bad word or cuss for the year
I'm really interested in visiting an archaeological sight for my "you pick it", have any ideas where I might find one?
LOOOVEE THIS! 💋 can't wait to love u tomorrow
Today has been long and disappointing to say the least.
Whoever it was on Twitter that told me to watch in "The Good Guy," thank u! Wow! That was the story of my life for almost 3 yrs
Drought may delay BLM horse policy shift from roundups to fertility control in ... - The Republic
"the zoo is full!" hahaha, too funny!
Fantastic presentation tonight - you were the best note to end on!
Chatted with actor Aaron Paul, AKA Jesse Pinkman of Breaking Bad Sat night in Vegas. Nice guy & a great actor. Continued success to him.
a note to everyone in the world from the son of a speech pathologist: the coffee drink is pronounced [e-spres-oh], not express-o.
i work.with high school sports teams and run their fundraising programs. Are you a coach?
what is that? Cause I didn't say specifically what it was lol
my body doesnt match with short men. Its a shame tho.
La Vida Locavore:: Organic vs Conventional. Is that really the ...
Of course, I'm not paying attention in my History class. Pottermore is way more important.
RT : RT : "My fake plants died because I did not pretend to water them" - Mitch Hedberg
I used to date
If i woke up next you CieraMariexoxo
What a great day @ #thatcamp #lac! Can't wait to talk with the folks at #chnm tomorrow. How can LACs & R1s productively collaborate?
I passed both last year cause they were easy. I have four this year & geometry and global are soo hard so I think I'm gonna fail
Today's Layoff Bounceback Tip: Follow up on job applications--make a phone call, send an email, knock on a door. Human contact is key!
the rain messes up my mood in all kinds of ways
Tiger misses the cut.
lol o nope.. My phone doesn't support it -_-
fact. I totally agree with the jj's idea - whenever I think about ordering out for lunch at work I have to say no jj's :(
Did they catch the crazy dude?
Congrats to our 8 state #AfterschoolforAll Champs!
this ish about to drive me krazie...
Put it together
wishing the #bucks weren't sucking so bad. It's kinda lonely in the verizon center when they're down by 20.
Markakis hits triple, driving in a run. 4-0 #Orioles. Yeah, he's fine.
preordering anything that isn't naturally scarce is insane. See: Video games.
& want you to WIN a trip for 2 to X-Fighters Freestyle #Motorcross! FOLLOW to enter!
This book would be a great resource to get us through
Still cant help but wonder what might have been if Melo would have just hit the books.
Thanks! We are excited too.
Bradley Cooper...also being interviewed backstage. Do they have a special holding tank backstage for the cast of the Hangover?
thx for follow, we are in the same hood!
Thanks for following! Looking forward to seeing you !
Went back in time last night
ok why? Love that movie!
AH FUCK RT : He still a HEAT fan you aint doing shit RT : i change david all the time. fuck is he talking about?
time is love, gotta run.
Leading ENDER'S GAME book discussion tomorrow. Talking point: Did Orson Scott Card model Ender on Robert E. Lee?
Never knew #Wendy's had breakfast #good morning
To all my story peeps lol the story is up hope u enjoy it and everyone is in it but srry if u were not In it THT much
u really from the islands aint u lmao
Wonderful news to read Leslie. Congrats! How are you feeling?
Ah nigga turnt up tonight me and my bro bought to do whatever we want we on 1 in these L.A. Streets
Oh, no. It totally will. ABC needs it but I'm just surprised that it hasn't happened yet.
LMFAO holy shit I can't.. you're retarded
It must Incredible To Wake Up In The Mornings And Realise That There Are 22 million Little Monsters That Would Die For You
Thanks for the follow! Therese
thanks for the rt. :)
lol I don't even have that app on this phone. Hold up
TRIVIA THURS: He was cast as Curly in THE THREE STOOGES: THE MOVIE but dropped out because he didn't want to gain weight for the role
No idea what he's talking about. via "I love deadlines. I like the whooshing sound they make as they fly by."-Douglas Adams
Anyone want an American Bulldog puppy? My neighbor (cincinnati) has four of them, free.
its getting closer every year. Wisc GB prime ex.. A&M winning last year, butler odds on fav this year.. Talent gap closing
Yeah! I hit you back. Did you get my email?
#17 The Howlin' Wolf - New Orleans, LA
I'm just having fun.. ;) you know me! I miss you too... what you doing?
Hi Bob. We started our week long outreach for families and children of warriors w/ #PTSD. Would you like the links?
I agree 100% where's all the sweet nice girls at?
lmfaooo yezzzzzzz I was like "k" ! And how did you see this ?
How is Zack!?
Right?...right? Don't pretend like you didn't at least give it a thought hahaha. Every girl likes flowers(;
I used to think everyone was entitled to happiness.......I know better now
goodbye Grandma
If I could offer one piece of advice to business owners it would be to have some integrity. Follow through with your promises.
that would be pretty fun but I am not going to be in attendance to see Rey drop the 619 on someone.
the busy busy busy never ends! holidays=antirelax
I need a good girl to settle my ass down
Ah I feel bad now
What an awesome photo! Thank you for sharing! Do you mind if we post this on our FB (giving you credit of course)?
The Bright Idea Challenge is great! Wish we would have applied. Is it only once a year?
RIP MCA. You changed music forever.
You must have been one of the people that had their power restored.
between this and the killing, I really need Helo to be playing a hero on my tv. I no like him bad. *pouts
Is there a particularly good #linkeddata set that people have used in #lifescience projects? Tweet it!
RT : I want Mexican food
also, Bill Buckner to Leon Durham
draw on her face
Day dreaming. Always fun, right?
“: I speak baby. #DoctorWho” RT stormageddon dark lord of all
Bar hoping in the city
hey tweeps what up
i still hate you just as much as when you left.
Uncomfortable with message auto industry can save US. Out of touch with today & tomorrow.
lmao red meat...
College application essays: Childhood obesity
How's everyone enjoying the show?!
if you could start an nfl franchise with any player who would it be? My pick is Rodgers, u can win now and he's still young
hey thats mean!):
the music you have playing in cab-vertisements is horrible.
#GoTribe Nah no studying time to watch baseball
Thanks for the RT
When you see one of your followers in real life for the first time and don't know whether to say hey or not <<<
It was 90° at work today..#turnontheAC !!
Vegas tweet.
Great stuff. Learn a lot and am pleasantly surprised when I already know something these pros have to say.
So apparently I look bad in skinny jeans. Great.
I complain to everyone thinking thats gone make me feel better but it don't.
Function first. That is what actually makes the $$. A little wonkiness in #Ux will be ignored if they can pay w/o pain
Only in America u can find people that check their phones every 10 sec and still manage to loose them
Aww yess I do. Both Hannah and me do. Mine is and Hannah's is Thanks so much! :)
Now drinking a Mikkeller Beer Geek Bacon. Better than the Hop Breakfast by far
And hey sweetie, well I need you here tonight
Anything listed online we have those quantities in stock. So you tell us and we can work it out!
In France, a five year old child can buy an alcoholic drink in a bar
I still enjoy the first half of Batman 89. The second half is garbage. Keaton rocks, though.
Anticipate news typhoons, and prepare to ride the wave. Is there a hot event coming up? A concert? A sporting event? A movie? Plan a tie-in.
Got ya hommie. Check out my youtube page www.youtube.com/soloxquzit
here & looking forward to today's tweet chat. this long week has again screamed along.
gotta come fck wit me in the booth one of these days
I finish like 10 minutes ago hahahahah :P
XD My longest was 96k, but the rewrite ended up closer to 80k. I'll probably cut a lot of this, too.
Awww :-) RT They will take good care of each other Gemini and Cancer
Apparently the word is a trademark registered with the federal government.
Great show tonight! Soo much love in the A! Just got back to the room. Bout to T.A.P. wit ! Back to the M tom Fo #HP!
for wood. So~ idek dude.
Whether people love you or hate you, you're still gonna shine!
whats good man? long time no speak how's everything?
I did Love the old one! (and was probably the only one haha) but yes, Cheers to new beginnings!
I need a fade. S/O to The Cut in Portage Park.
"Vintage Trouble" is crushing it at Cosmopolitan Las Vegas! Lounge was empty. 2 songs in 200+ and growing by minute.
RT : #highered should never use stock images of people. Never, ever. True or False and why?
From Brown to Green and Everything In Between | The thrifty guide for a nifty garden
You already know that's going to be, lol.
don't follow the man, follow the idea.
how many TD's you running back for this year...or INTs
That shot becky'dem just took made me sick!! I couldnt be a part of that
Hungry for some tasty pie? 3 lucky folks will win a voucher from in the raffle tomorrow! NOM!
Kansas I am in you. Checking off state number 49. Watch out Utah I'm coming for you next.
#ALEXISATRUEGENTLEMAN AND HE SHOWS IT TO
Gripping on her ass nigga say i disrespect him .
Some chicks live in crop jackets.. smh
got at least 15 new albums on my itunes today
A Gaugert garage sale?! Please tell me the old Titleists, TaylorMades and Callaways haven't gone yet!!
I think girls are naturally fake!
If eye-rolling burned calories, women would never have to diet
I miss phone booths & phone rooms in public spaces. Listening to this guy's plans to screw over his friend is not something I want to hear.
#3WordsOfAdvice Put God First..
Huzzah indeed! Although, I wish you could join us for the movie tonight. >:(
Gonzalez Northgate Market rocks! Just visited for the first time and had real authentic Mexican Food!
Let's get this to OT #LAKERS Awesome playoff basketball
Nice! And nothing, just listening to music and editing pics~
yes indeed!!
"Klout believes you are influentail in Bangkok." Is that like being big in Japan?
that, but then it's aggregating stuff from my actual blog. grr.
If this is of the Microphones: Thank you for sending me the chords to Headless Horseman 10 years ago, sir
I bet you feel silly after you said begging for coffee never works. :)
RT : Encourage your colleagues 2 go to & present at conferences, geekfests, creative mornings, code & coffee, hack nights.
don't feel like I have done enough when I do the w/o like it says.wanted to know if u got those kind of results doing what it says
Feel free. If you would like to talk about it, let me know.
Space shuttle Discovery piggyback final flight just went over my car on GW Parkway. Amazing sight.
im back! bitches!
I want to direct pornographic films
Yer on notice, This candyass will mess you up if you don't get out here & represent w/rest of team Tamoguchi /cc
Can you send me please a swatch of this "Tutu" color. I'm a lit professor and need some pzazz on my walls, too.
' My Bitch tho . . . I'm bored tho an boo thang gotta handle that shit first! Lmao
LKG is deep
who's watching TruTV right now??
Connecting to Collaborate!
A lot of celebrities in Clintonville tonight: Mason Crosby, Dick Bennett, Bill Jartz, UW tight end Sam Arneson.
Only if you have green chili too.
Contemplating where to run
Thanks, Nate! You're very kind. Glad you're back!!
Air India aims to become India's 1st green airline in one year
If you don't follow me on #Instagram, you should! Just search "bearheiser" and there I'll be. Look forward to SEEING you!!!
Time for a Parise takeover
Ah! What league? We are playing in CoHi, though I wanted Dupont. I'm here if you need a testimonial. You'll have a blast!
The new Mute Math is incredible!
When is #NataliePortman going to do a Sequel to The Professional! We need a bad ass girl hit man movie ASAP
It was. Totally made me want to learn to be a cheese snob! ;)
Watching the grammys
Thanks man... but I have a question ;)
Thanks for the valuable social media insight this morning !
We in here ee goonn set it all
stick my dick in a circle, but I'm not fuckin' around motherfucker.
Great Day for GSHL hoops 3 teams in Final 4
Yup RT : Everyone has one friend that they secretly hate.
Today is Regular deadline. 5/18 is Late Deadline. bc you are an Alum 50% off. Can't wait to see what you submit. Always great!
not alot. I am pretty tired :P I'll tweet u laterz k?
Re-discovering ATB today, and forgot how good his stuff is.
That's sad they painted over the red! Cool that it's still in the same shape, though!
rachel maddow, where art thou?
I know right need to start booking in the summer
Lock it in and turn me on.
Got a long day ahead of me!
Ok why can't I follow anyone anymore?!?!
The Mechanical Turk requester interface is making me crazy. CRAZY.
We are so excited!
he told me the same thing last night...
I didn't know that Comcast offered internets access to students in need for $ 10/month ?!?!? In Philly.
TONIGHT Rookie Night, Crowded Drunk-Filled House, Never Get a Cab for Cutie $30
Correction on that last tweet: should have been Off. Reb. % allowed by defense.
Aren't you supposed to be in Utah??
he just got married unk he down in texas i gave him your number. Ima kall u later but tell me watt u think of the mix- tape
Why you gtta be so extra??
": This thing where I go and get donuts every night at midnight is just a phase right? PS, I'm FINE."
example of a wrong moment for my ass to jiggle is in front of old perverted guys. I just feel so uncomfortable. 😒
i hate when this happens. omg.
Karluk Manor, housing for #homeless chronic inebriates, set to open.
Raaa!!!! All my jeans fit too big! I'm irritated with sagging pants!
Two blondes were driving to Disneyland and the exit sign reads: DISNEYLAND LEFT. They started crying and headed home
RT/ Your music sounds amazing!!
Yesterdays living social was food related too, the box o food for two days...have to admit its tempting
“: are you on there as thebandee? I will have to look for you :)” I think u can search and find me that way
I'm making mama kaugh
I'm pretty sure this #shirtoff is illegal in most countries...
yea well could i for 9 days just to teach you well id drive to come and teach you im going to mo the 25
I'm going to tweet u on beliebintx and here! Just tell meeehh!
my brothers horrible singing woke me up -_- great now I can't go back to sleep.
Thanks for the RTs, mentions:
Yeah baby, "and holding" never felt so good. ;o)
My headphones and Privacy screen protector came today. Yay 🎉🎈
fast! I nbox my number luv
You should be motivated by someone else's success, never jealous. Regardless if you like them or not.
Drawing the best gift ever for Tuesday :) He's gonna love it :D
Do you make any of these big Twitter mistakes? unprofesh, no profile pic, uneven follower-follow ratio, too self-serving, too many updates.
I would not recommend the veggie burger; hubby had the meat your maker - to die for apparently.
thats great! we will be in contact shortly ... is there an area that you specialize in?
I wonder if the first person to ever pop corn thought they were under attack.
Q4 via : Have you ever taken a risky form of transport to reach somewhere you wouldn't otherwise have been able to?
"squeezing mind grapes"?
Wore that out freshmen year in Chatt, utc days Go Mocs!
i lost the count of how many times i twitted u asking u to follow me, but i won't give up cuz u tought us so:) I LOVE YOU :)
How I loved the "I Love Lucy" episodes when they were in Hollywood!
meeting with about an upcoming teleseminar on social media marketing
wish i had somethin to do(:
I'm recording them cause I'm watching the all star stuff on tnt lol you?
Smoova One Day Away..#"Foundation" Alleyway2Broadway. 1Moneyball......on the way..January 25th...
didn't get to lookup beer places for you. Go to a store and buy Southern Tier, esp the dark stuff
Just noticed that I now get 4G on my phone
Villaraigosa grumping about applause dragging out the meeting. Good thing it didn't start 23 minutes late...oh, wait...
Are you going to be tweeting #SOTU?
I love the show #DeadliestCatch I've done nothing but hard labor my whole life have delt with just about any an everything! Please
#BWELA schedule begins tonight with a trip to The Bazaar, Jose Andres food heaven
Filner starts by correcting: he's not against expansion of Convention Center.
Hey Steve, thanks for tweeting and posting the infographic! We were surprised at some of the comparisons.
that last tweet asking about refreshments: it's the #MarriageAmerica conference in Orlando. Please come through w/some goodness!
Hello, three day weekend, great to see you.
yeah it rained like that for 2 hours! And I had to throw on some jeezy!!
connection test
Do you know any good local restaurants in Indy? I am downtown and could use a suggestion.
RT" Very disappointed in Judge Flanagan's decision yesterday. I'm the only one allowed to break the rules in WI.
This test is taking way to long!
Oh, did the Mountain Dew arrive already? We had planned it for the 3pm break.
I've put a lot of work into twitter...I wish I liked it more!
I agree that there are other ways to getting animals to live with us in harmony, thanks
I think not
was there seriously no app to fix steve jobs? fucking pissed...
you still got that wow! factor dont you...
Having a name beginning with the letter "A" = daily pocket dials to your cell phone.
Ive been working out girlie, we just got to meet up so we can excersize our abs with all our laughing!lol
Hey Websurfers! It's 5:00 pm, time to close shop! Hope you enjoyed today's videos. Remember to check in tomorrow for our top three comedy...
Judge says "does that day work for the resoondent?" Mercy frowns. Judge: something wrong counsel? Mercy: well, where else is he going to
Tune into ESPN U
“: so bummed to miss you guys!!!! :(” yeah me too. Wanted some girl talk :)
RSVP: Renaissance Literary & Talent
Dear , please keep the Thursday night primetime lineup forever. Seriously. Forever. XOXO, Nora
Thanks! We appreciate it!
Hope to see some of you tonight at Cocktails for a Cause! Join us in Red from 6-8pm with proceeds going to Alzheimer's Association!
I'd say the World Cup because it's easier to track all of the matches (and thus more followable) than the Olympics
follow back
and you as well mate. we're thinking of doing a Do Dinner tomorrow night. you in?
i hate it when people try to grow up too fast
Pics or it didn't happen.
Dear New Yorkers: If you call out of work because of 2 inches of snow, you're a loser.
Lol i just look stupid my damn self I ment to put shit
Buffalo & Broadway in the Third Ward today. Don't forget to vote for us to appear in the Great Food Truck Race!!
;) you know it.
Dead serious. & He actually has a large fan base. I don't get it..
me either.. Last year it was those dumb zhu zhu pets which surprised me.
I'm your sole follower. Typical
Getting more ink an sending did tweet at the
#ThoseThreeWords Stop, no and don't... I SAID "BIOTCH!!!"
RT : AVENGERS press screening delayed because they "accidentally deleted the movie." Welcome to the digital age.
Kalan cried in my lap because he was put in a scary new bedroom while my parents were gone. Poor little fellow. I'll try to fix it tomorrow.
have to miss it this time around, I'm sure it will be great as always.
Late adopter on this, but #Shameless is completely awesome.
LOL! I so get that...rescued cat has been through four iphone chargers and a laptop cable...despite trying to hide them!
that's good. I still don't have a job, but I have like a full schedule. Lol
nike air yeezy 2 Mid-range LA Suites Hints for discovery exciting ...
he had hunting magazine and seemed to be staring at me the whole flight
Need to catch those 💤 😲
THE BOYZ ARE BACK. So proud of my babies 😍
#USC #Writers conference - Ivory Madison authenticity and pragmatism all you need to be a great writer
Fb *is* ugly. I'm glad at least one other person agrees with me on this.
Holy cow just had the best back message ive ever gotten ....
Leadership: what is your vision? Do you communicate it? If you ask others about your vision can they explain it? Clear, concise, consistent.
What are you guys using to sync Twitter posts with BP activity at #ds106?
I was switching back and forth. I'm back #TheVoice exclusively now.
Chicks waiting on Boosie to get out of Prison only Date Goon Niggas that wear Tank tops, COOGI PANTS, Reeboks & Gold Teeth..
It's Google's 12th birthday today. Let's get them an 800 lb. gorilla...
love it - give em hell!
Thanks for the follow!
All we'd ever need -Lady Antebellum
#Texas fan check-in on Yahoo! Sportacular (#Temple #Texas)
Im offically addicted to baby Food.strawberries and bananas...str8 out The jar no spoon
The bat mitzvah celebration is about to begin!
I been voting every week! I hope you win!
A full grown man just ran by me crying, like bawling.
what about dogs.
Feels like eternal sleep.... im living a dream
She hurts a lot inside because he doesn't know that she knows way more than what he thinks she does.♥
From the starters to the pen, pitching has been a huge diappointment
Still feeling kind of crappy...I'm thinking Panera's French Onion soup and then a Chipotle burrito?
If there were a MLB broadcaster toilet bowl tournament, Joe Block and Davey Nelson would be a one seed...
hm.....interesting
? Thanks, didn't know I was?
I just have to say, warped tour was amazing. If it hasnt come to your area yet, plan on going. you wont regret it. <3
Damn straight! I want my push button dinner dispenser. And Rosie.
My goal tonight to have the TV off right as Nantz delivers his schmaltzy line. Think of it as my pale imitation of
#noregrets regarding the past, but I do love my #newjob oh so much!
Thanks the artists that we get to work with. Their great talents make great tunes possible!
I'm almost to 1000 tweets!!!!
It's only Tuesday?! JK! Have a good one! “: happy tuesday lacey
How's day 5 at HTC? Change is better than a rest, right? Hope they know how lucky they are to have you :)
Do not fear death, but rather the unlived life. You don't have to live forever. You just have to live.
School is so boring!
you should have come over fool.,,,,,,
Something good is going to happen this week...I know it !!
It's dope people are suggesting songs for me to sample but the thing is I'm more into composing original materials.
Looking god'
got my tickets Lee. I overpaid but I'm on the floor next to basket.
Good Morning! Nice...way to train those shoes RT : I have over 200 miles on my new running shoes already :)
I got plug like the back the screen
One woman in the final. Way to go, America. Seems This is a Man's Man's Man's World was a fitting song.
Need to hit a hipster dive in BV that has cable RT : Love Direct TV, but not right now. and I are going to miss...
Do anyone know any decent casting director workshops on the westside... or at least, not in the valley?
Jelly beans are big business. It's big Republican business, run by a wonderful family of hard-working people
Should we ask him about the radio? Ya but like quietly so no one steals the idea i don't wanna ask! Ask breanna to ask but quietly she's ...
Miami Dolphins undrafted rookie free agents sign deals
lol have u seen this vid? My fav line: "Big Shoes, Big Socks!'
Nothing to do till wednesday... Hm ok roys
indeed, but the Post article had the former
I wish I had my own PERFECT WORLD <3 <3
We welcome our new members and look forward to a wonderful season of song and praise!
. "You can get away with murder here!"
Alright guys, this is the last opportunity to break up with your girl so you don't have to buy her a vday gift before it looks too obvious.
If using for biz. Key element most people forget to do is set real "Goals" for each Social Media marketing platform.
I know >.< its been missing for nearly a week =/ :D how did you get $70? :)
@ the library: this patron is so muddled she can't even ask for help in a comprehensible way.
where did you find this!?!? I've been looking forever!!
#sometimesigetsickof people .. When they start saying shit they don't even know what their talking about #STFU 😡💨👎🔫
I'm looking for teen moms to interview, must live in #Gwinnett County. Drop me a message at
do I even have to tell you how ridiculous I think this woman is? She's off my radar
For the record, KU IS 5-0 when I change shirts at halftime
... You want someone to call your own but you don't wanna meet anyone? Hmm ok lol
I hate my life-_____- lol
gonna sleep now you?
ima call you ok
#Wisconsin #wiunion We are moving! The slide to leadership is confirmed. The #nation is also very supportive, and so are all democracies.
No one knows wat that's means.....Lmao....
Happy Friday!!
Wow it takes much longer that I thought to go from Beta release to Final release of the product. Well, perfection takes time :).
So it all ends Saturday huh? Any last words?
& i know he's smiling, saying 'don't worry about me'
So So Def shirts are for sale now on Ebay , visit www.eBay.com to order yours now . $15.99 each , Enjoy!
fixing people's websites, man so many people do it wrong...
The more I get to see, hear and be around an amazingly attractive woman, the less appealing she typically becomes.
you have a date in mind?
Final countdown has begun with 100 days to go until # London2012.
RSVP: Metamorphic Films
I can't wait to go to the #BSPI conference in Scottsdale, Arizona and introduce myself to everyone. :)
Thanks for the follow
Too many goodbyes! :'(
Oh you didn't know?
yeah thats HB in RUssian :) i'm falling asleep in this class
It's already too hot outside.
you are a tweeting fool today. what's up?
Gonna get some pass da line tickets for
hey guess what the nice doctors in white coats are taking me to the soft padded room and even gave me a hug my self jacket!!
Must be volleyball Thursday...scattered storms this afternoon with a wind advisory going into tomorrow!
Why is every1 rushing to comment on story? It's on MULTIPLE sites, just go read it there
A recent study has shown that playing beer pong contributes to the spread of mono and the flu. Yeah, if you suck at it.
I don't care what the haters say that movie Hunger Games was good as hell.
Another rockin' #MiamiCharity: , Heightening the awareness of the danger of ovarian cancer
It's time for some Cozy Comfort Food...Tonight's Feature: Grilled Cheese and Creamy Tomato Bisque...M M Good!!!
#FrancesTheMakeUpGuru : BITCHES! IF YOUR FACE DOESN'T ATLEAST MATCH THE COLOR OF YOUR HANDS A LITTLE BIT, YOU HAVE A BIG MU'FUGHIN PROBLEM!
to effing stressed :\
Congratulations to the 2012 Tony Award Nominees! BEST REVIVAL OF A PLAY: Death of a Salesman, Gore Vidal’s The Best Man, Master Class, Wit
So pleased you enjoyed your meal at Sweet Mango Café.
Parent conferences <<<<
:) glad to hear it! thanks a bunch
tweets to much 😝
"Share eat-in kitchen and adult-sized bathroom with mature, open-minded, male entertainment professional you would rarely see."<- I'll pass
#thingsyoushouldntsay : "That's so gay!" when you don't like something. It hurts.
I so badly want to live in New York. :(
lol thats not what i ment! I ment its not true that i dont like yall that much!
happy mother's day beautiful!.<3(: have an amazing day with you're lil princess.(: stay strong as always.(: love you!!^.<3
Im just a lesbian on the weekends. RT : omg stop it! i'm laughing so hard right now lol
Looking 4ward to supporting at the with this evening.
RT : Wearing skinny jeans when you know you far from skinny #thatsabadidea---- lmao
Dvr is set ! RT : Appearing on The Dr. Oz Show today share 4 of my top cancer fighting supplements for 2012
Zynga now stinks. No fun to play their games now. I miss the good old days.
Bookshelves... Are heavy.
Heaven is such that all who have lived well, of whatever religion, have a place there.
No, like Cole called out and isn't coming.
“: Did you know that Alfredo our painter was in jail for a month?” >> great.
LOLL I'm justkidding that'd be funny tho
I will. You too!
don't you have an iPhone? Oh and it's those thumbs up ones lol
Gotta hit this Gym after work smh it's gonna be rough but I'm up for the challenge !!
I was wearing that shirt last weekend. "Yeah!"
Some kid farted while we were taking a test today hahaha
bon comb over
will get to listen next week. Been crazy busy
-__________- I need Pittsburgh. I am so over this.
May the force be ever in your favor!
I can't wait to share the photos of my mothers birthday cake w| you!
#imagine Louis leans forward to kiss you. You avoid him by looking away.Then he holds your chin softly he whispers"Stop being hard to get"
Do you think San Antonio has good musicians/bands? Tell us who you think they are...
Facebook twitter instagram repeat x100. My before bed regimen.
We are in full swing getting ready for this year's fest! Info, links, and contests coming soon!
haha where did you see this? this just made my day haha.
easy - Palmer isn't worth two 1st rounders...
free tats for life u get me in a film of urs even though u can buy anythin u want. 21 jump was funny as hell. great actor man
RT : is joining the Air Force with me! :D // haha :P
We aint goin out without a fight, we with whatever
yay! Get your logo here inside of egg head! Welcome to the party!
Testing twitteringing from my phone.
yo ass is crazy
awww, you should have told her that it's an American custom to take pictures of your masseuse's feet.
Damn that sucks
best 1st dance wedding song- Better Together by Jack Johnson!!!!
Thinking is the hardest work there is, which is the probable reason so few engage in it. -Henry Ford
Saw the cutest childrens cartoon series, "Frannys feet" My granddaughter said "Look Nana there's a movie about you and your feet-ty soaps
Tune in at 10am today to Wfla970 to the Duncan Duo Radio Show where Aaron Davis from Hillsborough Title will be one of today's guest
Rebound control is so much easier with a puck than with a ball.
Actually 4 bracelets from Stella and Dot.
True. We forget teenhood is temporary. We don't have to forget those years, just put them in the past where they belong.
It rained while it was sunny? What the shit?
#18conf Brian Samuels is leading us in the swim!
Love that the President supports same-sex marriage! But pls lets focus on issues like education + ensuring our kids hv enough teachers
#3WordsAfterArnisPizza:Cheesy BBQ Chicken. My favorite!
i Beleive in Peace an Quit
Respiration is composed of two acts - first, inspiration, and then expectoration.
God created you 2 be FRUITFUL & MULTIPLY // you can't do either unless you're CONNECTED to the source! (Jesus) Gen. 1:26-28 & John 15
I dunno. I hope it's a kitty face. :3
Ima still work hard on these two sprained ankles cus I'm a mtf G
This guy wanted to talk to me and I told him I have a lot of hw.. I realized that even If i had a lot I would always talk to YOU
Is blaine gabbert going to cry?
That sounds delish! Enjoy!
YOU ARE CORDIALLY INVITED TO DOWNTOWN ORLANDO TO WATCH ME MAKE A COMPLETE FOOL OF MYSELF IN HONOR OF MY BIRFDAY.
yeah.. but like add stuff If u want.. I had this good idea for gb but forgot it.
no, I can't say I do that one. You're on your own. Weirdo.
Why is everyone looking at me strange now that I'm wearing this mistletoe belt?
Political circle, pow pow I'm gonna network and blow up. I'm creating my own circle
sure thing. #howdoyoulikeyoursteak?
hahah seriously.. let it be me. NOW.hahaha
Flavors at Harvard Sq: Gingerbread and Pumpkin Pie!
I love it when I have a GENIUS book idea before 8am ;-) Great way to start the day.
I Just Cut The Grass & Gave It A Hairline' . #LOL .
revision overload
you are amazing at what you do. You are honestly an inspiration. And please to Toledo, Ohio sometime. <21
Thanks to , I just viewed a set of newly digitized C19 cartoons on a big screen: zoom-zoom.
Wow! Beautiful day! Worked out at Snap Fitness then walked to Subway in shorts and flip flops!
Almost done with all my projects, and then freshman year is basically over :D
Follow Billy!
Take advantage of this beautiful sunny day! Get some fresh air and go for a jog :)
Will they score fifty? | Or will the D get a clue | And slow passing game? |
4) Most important… Have fun with my son and enjoy the time we spend together.
Stone and Hamilton off the bench!
congrats to Julie Thisdale, Kevin Forr, and Andrea Powell, all winners this AM and part of our family here at Generations 1023 and 94 one.
That sucks girl : / what classes you got?
no problem kiddo :) I am always here for you even in Louisiana :)
Thanks! RT great job on Easy to forget how far you've come. Keep up the good work.
what if I buy the tickets?!
will do!
I'll be glad when Suga Foot gets in so he can get in the bed. #missing my baby!!
A2: Definitely more.! Napster kind of made digital "lending" commonplace...
ONE DIRECTION IS COMING TO PHILADELPHIA ON July 6th!!! MY BIRTHDAY AND WHERE I LIFE!!! I NEED TO SEE THEM!!!!
Well that is just infuriating Captials, and completely embarrassing.
It's a Snow and Ice ocalypse in the Northwest. Remember the day you'd eat icicles off the gutter. Now it just seems gross!
Tonight will be different. Heh {RT : So I woke up this morning and wasn't hungover. I think I did something wrong.
Gym flow motivation--Remember When
Looking at out law star again cause it my favorite anime
Landed first role of the year, got a new agent...I like how this year is starting out
well thank you so much! :)
Fashion question: Is it OK to wear a white dress to a wedding....white with black trim.
Thank you for the congrats!
I think I might be addicted to coffee. Congratulations, Los Angeles, you got me. #COFFEE!!
I saw six men kicking and punching the mother-in-law. My neighbour said 'Are you going to help?' I said 'No, six should be enough.'
Well obviously.
"If all you have is a hammer, everything looks like a nail."
Excited about a Pool Party tomorrow..at Drais..Might post some photos, keep tuned
My night was insane.!
i saw that interview, he likes a land line! Funny how most of us need the new stuff.
Get well, come back stronger. Love having you as a Patriot. True class.
TALK TO U AN THE AM I NEED SOME SLEEP
Cool review! Thanks for sending this to me. Did you write it?
If I offered FREE, U.S. Made, Attractor Roasted Peanut Suet tube samples (3-pack) for just the cost of shipping ($4.94), would you try it?
you should TOTALLY do it because fans get a chance to vote! And you know peeps!
At brothertons in mount healthy
i would have thought that after the movie premiered, would have a lot of followers, but THANK GOD he has the same amount. ♥
I am gearing up to send out my March newsletter, send me your emailed to get a very special treat! xx
*sigh* My food has run out.. its either starving or shopping. :/
Congratulations on a great show tonight! Dolly West's Kitchen a MUST SEE!!
Everyone follow his tweets are swagged!!!
I made a facebook account.. Sent out some friend requests :)
omfg this is hilarious! Oh she ratchet! Oh!
- When you can ask for it. You're too old for it.
hard to explain in 140, twitter version: sports, athletes, social media, photos, videos, charities, training, etc. ha
due to the current weather condition, cuddle buddy applications will now be accepted.
to quote :
What's worse - a country being led by a lying megalomaniac aspiring dictator or deluded people who love his every move?!?
2 Lights, my favorite pop band. (OK, I've known em since they were babies, but still!) www.myspace.com/twolightsband
I got stuck under my mom bed
RT : When pandora's playin the best jams >>>>>>>
At LA Fitness working out...
we love hooters but which hooters do we love
Once my everything; now my enemy.
At Whole Foods in Charlottesville, the cheesemonger sings. Loudly.
Interesting opening tag
Horray for he is having a great game so far. Congrats man. I should have started him this week.
Apparently it will be in the high 80s on #Marathon Monday?! Terrible timing. (Is that even safe?)
The only Carlos Fuentes I've ever read was Artemio Cruz, but I read it four times (to teach it). It's crazy good.
thank you my friend. i will return the favor.
good! Now you have no excuse not to check your tweets ;)
Hope you checked out the article and enjoyed. It was a fun write.
Just shook Gov. Kitzhaber's hand. Feeling pretty good about it. Excited to hear his speech on clean energy!
tell her I say congrats 🎉😊
Can't wait to see the best friend tomorrow (:
Burning Rangers?
I once was obedient & in control, but now, because of my redemption through Jesus, I am surrendered and live to serve Him.
The leadership instinct you are born with is the backbone. You develop the funny bone and the wishbone that go with it. ~ Elaine Agather
Book signing today, 4 pm, at the Barnes & Noble, Oak Brook, IL, 297 Oakbrook Center.
ok back off he's mine
RT "She must be from Egypt.... Because she's the queen of de_Nile." #ilovemydaddy // This is fantastic!! ...Ohh, Pops!
Digg Scrapes Facebook for Diggers' Real Identites and Photos
just got back from bboy battle, put together a dope jam. peace to all who came out, vibe was just right
is awesome :)
chord changes are overrated
The amazing world of Gumball is hilarious today. It's the closest thing I can get to chowder 😔
... You might know!
where you gone be at watching the draft tonight?
stop playin give her my #
There is a bat in and room
Lining up my pole
Sarah, quit checking facebook during the movie.
Involuntary actions. But thank you! RT : You make some awesome faces when you drum.
Had a good night with elijahhhh<3 :)
MY LLAMA LIKE YOU
The Miami Eagles agree to terms with free agent OT Ryan Harris. One-year deal.
Yo me and this chick were straight.....until she lit up a cig...dropped her like a bad habit.
RT : Follow us on Instagram at ConnectMeetings for a behind-the-scenes look over the next couple days!
Justice for #Trayvon. , please RT. Rally this Saturday at Freedom Plaza NW #DC 2-4pm. Wear a hoodie or all black.
Awesome!! RT : just registered for my first 2 of 9 NYRR races to qualify for the 2013 #nycmarathon!
New Years Eve 2009 at PRIVE hosted by the December 2008 Misses *PLAYBOY PLAYMATES* JENNIFER & NATALIE the CAMPBELL Twins.
Our July training class is wrapping up today! They're a great group from diverse backgrounds all eager to speak up for Bmore's foster kids!
Certainly got a lot of attention tonight at the #AcademyAwards. Long live the King of playing hooky ;-)
Today's been a good day so far.
Never forget where you came from
pretty much rocks
By the time school ends, I think I'm gonna commit suicide.
Off to Chicago!
I'm finally, finally going to Golden today! Can't wait!
is confusing Anja Oyen Vister with Emiliana Torrini. or maybe it's the other way around.
yeah also want you guys to come play a party for me.
Shout out to in article about his tweets in Va. House of Delegates to #spreadtheword!
nope >.< still wrong.
thank you for your presence, comments and support!!
President Obama’s 51st birthday is coming up. If you’re thinking about getting him something, he could use about $14 trillion.,
Fine, eat your pizza...smile all you want fucker, I'm not dancing with you when you'r done.
I just want to let her kno
#UFC break. No way Garcia makes it to round 3.
Where do you think the most unusual place for a tattoo is??
Tigers are VERY desperate for more arms in the 'pen.
Surgery went well
Thank you for the follow, Marci Happy new year!
you're fine with either. I'm a big fan of the orange myself
FOLLOWED❤ TO
People who complain about people saying yolo are even more annoying then people who say yolo
Sittin here thinkin, bout all the shit you said to me. Even though we just made it, you got me drinkin heavily
My soul faint after you... Seeking your glory!
Let's become professors. Women's studies? I say yes. Become heroes of our generation? Sounds like a plan.
#theverge event was pretty hilarious - look for more Sigrid clones in 2012
Just drove a stranger home from the gas station at 2:00AM. I don't know weather to be proud or ashamed.
People expecting way too much out of that kid.
It's the best! Can't wait to start taking classes in #SF! I'd love to go through the whole series and teach it someday :D
why do i have to clean my room before school. thats the dumbest thing ive ever heard.
Mudbugs in March is TODAY. So what are you going to do? It's Saturday, if you don't have to work tomorrow, what's your excuse? Come on!
Good morning world! time to get up get out and get something
I need a drink!
How you do you do it like that..
Thank you honey. RT : Very. Red hot when you're around. :)
As a parent, I see homework for our 8yr old (overall) as practice for gr8 study habits. Bonus: Good family bonding
@ bfosler, jealous, they have the best buffalo chicken sandwich! geo, introduce your friend brian to a good mechanic
can this concussion just go away now? it's pissing me off.
Relax night
My Cheeto intake today has been abnormally high. But I had salad for lunch, so it's ok. Right?
#show this new pose barriers folk testing the limits has #pop culture fan Japan Australia crossed back
tx for the retweet. I like how we have our own story exchange!
Earning online MBA program, will be able to apply what you’re learning-right away.
jake's mom you fucking weirdo. RT : When I tell a joke wrong
Hi Craig, you can sideload an audiobook from your laptop to your iPad, but not eBooks as of right now.
You guys are funny.
Turkey sandwich for
I HATE for kicking off! NEVER watching it again!!!
Thanks for the RT!
yay! i didn't know you were going to DC... should be fun!
Life is what we make it n like a picture when u get the Chance u should jus take it!
Or shall I say up paper chasin
“: If you are going to be in Vegas this weekend, be sure and stop by my Valentine party" - that means you!
Us, too! So happy you're making the journey to Chicago for the show.
apparently now it's mr worldwide...
colored my hair back to it's natural color today, I missed it(:
ahh memorial day weekend.
Well she's my God LOL But seriously tho I can see why they should Pay Demi a little more. But she got
Celebrate #EarthDay early with a Green Team Tour. Saturday at either 12:30 or 2:30 p.m. take a 30 minute tour of the Nature Museum facility!
Thanks so much for the play-by-play. Really hated missing this session.
. Pplez REGRET iin Life EveryDay Nah of Wht Dey Did cuss it Affected Dhat Person !
Guys are all just a soul patch away from leading a completely different existence. For ladies it's a tattoo on one of your titties.
Nothing finer!
sure does seem like it would work. Probably a great strategy for your business.
this has went downhill since Eloy ugh
Cole Hamels says he qualifies for maintaining "old school" mentality cause he uses antique white for his frosted tip color
We have had a few calls tonight from davis from party guests who have drank too much-glad they made the right decision!
they were just getting mad because I said I didn't have anything to change into
Experience - the wisdom that enables us to recognise in an undesirable old acquaintance the folly that we have already embraced
Marc of Forever The Sickest Kids band wearing a Project 143 wristband during their show! Thanks Marc! www.facebook.com/project143
Everything falling today for the Bulldogs now. Ron Nored hits a deep three to give them a 22-18 lead with 5:30 to go.
email me or text that weird number I've been using
Romantic Tip #2: Give your lover a dozen roses - make 11 roses red and make 1 white - attach a note that says "In every bunch there's one...
RT If being a Little Monster gives you freedom
Watching this I realize I have zero emotional attachment to this #Coyotes team. If I did I'd be pretty excited.
White sox play at noon today. Day games are the best.
"A cobra snake entered the children’s house. [With my Nokero] I went inside and killed the snake." Reggina Kasera, Nokero user in Namibia
There are people who think that everything one does with a serious face is sensible. Georg Christoph Lichtenberg (1742 - 1799)
Can anyone explain to me what the big deal is with Instagram? What is it for?
They didn't check my Jesus credentials ;-)
Dr. Annulis speaking at 9 AM at MS Society of Certified Public Managers Conference at the IP casino in Biloxi, MS. Topic: Change Leadership.
Thanks for the recommendations!
It's funny when ppl are drunk the truth really does come out.
I wasn't talking about regional accents- Nevadans get to choose the correct pronunciation of their state.
Anything can become an "addiction".
Im watching the newest Ghost Adv. From friday...crying. RIP Melissa <3PINK<3
brought me a leftover brownie treat you made,after trying it,my coworker is frustrated you aren't selling them.
Go to to get some great moccasins & moccasin booties! Wear the booties with shorts, skirt, or dress...So cute :)
I need more followers!
“: Would you believe that I can't find a Hawaiian shirt horrible enough at Walmart. #fml” if it's the one Tom shops at, I believe it
If you work hard on your job you can make a living. If you work harder on yourself than you do on your job you can make a fortune. J. Rohn
Yes im like a twin of Zayn hes my hero
not in public
Tell Sam I say Hello! Miss you guys!
I finish my last big paper for the semester and my shirt comes in the mail on the same day. COINCIDENCE?!? Probably.
why u gotta be hatin !!!
I miss talking to you all! #TheTamTeam #MJFam (I have not forgotten you)
Thank you. I am folowing you.
10 Best Inanimate Objects on Twitter
OMG 20 MILLION STRONG!
And for anyone who wondered if the Celtics can challenge the Bulls should they reach Round 2, the answer after today is an emphatic yes.
I'd be up for some good debate. Anyone up for a debate? You pick the topic...
Alr I'm really going to sleep now lol goodnight!
Enjoying the smooth tunes of
Follow my brother
Excited for girls weekend and Launch!!
Thanks Jeremy!
Please teach my Prof. that marketing is a PROCESS of which advertising is part of, they are NOT the same thing!
Got a couple followers but ain't nobody hearin me... SMDH
I get around!
Cishek will now try to save his own win; sadly, he would only get credit for the W...
I prefer to get what I need and head home to the family and get the photos published
Hope everyone is enjoying the weekend. We're 50 minutes away from announcing the first winner of a free race entry, can't wait!
all of Chevys line up is fuel friendly now. They have the Eco line up.
RT : Gr8 companies support communities RT : Raymond James is title sponsor of April 27-28 open house!
Just arrived in Charlotte for NATS musical theater summer workshop! On-campus housing at UNC is pretty nice.
grrr.. Comcast is making me mad. About 2 seconds from shipping the box back
Any updates on those New Years resolutions FB?
Impressive. RT : Beaches, huh? I didn't even sit down and I've got sand in my crotch.
Join us 2nite #JENNandELLIOT live at #theNationalUnderground NO COVER, original #soul tunes by me! 10-11!
"We should acknowledge differences, we should greet differences, until difference makes no difference anymore."-- Dr. Adela Allen
Honestly loving you didn't do anything but hurt me in the end.
I love twitter during #PHILLIES afternoon games.
Never saw a raincoat that exposed so much leg and cleavage. Whimper.
there may have been some days when I lived in BC. Maybe I'm just excited about a nice day without wind.
Really love it when I go to the bio tutor center for help with homework and they lead me to the wrong answers.....
RT : As a predicate nominative: He is six-FEET-two? Or six-FOOT-two?
any chance they let William Shatner intro him "Khan"?
Got my oil change on!...finally...thanks to Andy & the boys at Good Year in Champlin!!
Damn this momentum is crazy!!! Dont stop get it get it let's go!!! Working on the fly on the way to Vegas
GOSH MAKE UP YOUR MIND...JK.
that is cool. Ive only been in the new venue once but it might have been one of the best venues I've ever been in.
Thanks--looks good.
Thank you! :)
The 4-year-old really enjoys playmates. At this stage the toddler will begin to play cooperatively with others.
Cafe 300 has turkey panini's, cheddar broccoli soup and lentil soup for you to enjoy on this rainy day!
Admittedly I don't have much to say - but have been stuck at 99 followers for a month or so. Help a brother out.
aww next time! and i wanna meet u too! =)
yea but this time for good
yea that may be
I wish my old spice body wash didn't say "gel douche" on the front.
Fake people talk about other people being Fake. Real people worry about their business and nobody else's.
8 hrs earlier than NYC time, can send youtube or Skype early in our day
Dude. This may require an intervention.
#blackfriday here it is!! Need a break from shopping? Grab ur friends & head to and let's have some cocktails! #MVP at door
Sentences to ponder: "Exaggeration, inexactitude and mendacity are the currency of politics."
Laying around sick all day watching hbo go. Some conclusions...
i need a new bf
No twitter I do not wanna follow All Time Low..
I'm pretty multi-cultural. Or were you objecting to the gendered noun? ;p
Fingers are rolling so bear with them.
hey hun gotta talk to your send me a text I dont have your cell #! 414-467-7243
Aw, am not home but I will check mail this afternoon. I am eating, don't worry! Thanks buddy!
I need someone to come do jumping jacks on my back! #SoMuchTension :(
“: such a talented chef and wonderful person!”you rock Florida girl thanks your pretty good yourself
Just wanted to say hey!:-) Hope u & Eddie r havin a great week. :-)
thanks for that wonderful tweet!
Citywide, 547 properties sold during the first three months of the year, up 12% from the same time a year ago
Smart move.
I saw Marvin Hamlisch play "The Way We Were" and "One" IN PERSON yesterday. If the Lord wanted to take me now, I'd understand.
Its been a long day! Going to bed. Goodnight (:
I wonder if people can see what circles the are in. So, can the person I put in my 'dislike' circle see that they are in that circle?
great point about polling. example: my cell's area code is not where i live, which would thwart pollsters. but less telemarketers!
just a heads up we retired #18 and peyton said he won't wear it wherever he goes
Finally replacing the Nexus One with a Galaxy Nexus. Hungry for #ICS!
did you ever get the answer to yesterday's Trivia question? Didn't see a winner. Is it Cream Puffs?
shes already dating mark sanchez - just like Lin another guy who won't be a starter next year
Time to really focus on baseball now.
"RDA will die of its weight. It's like an African rhino that just collapses and dies in the desert." -prof predictions
“To insure good health: Eat lightly, breathe deeply, live moderately, cultivate cheerfulness, and maintain an interest in life.” - W. Londen
#ravennation is ready so pumped
if u r a filmmaker - this is a must to know about: www.MakeYourMovieNow.com
Okay, April's final has been set free! Now onto May and Stamp Out Hunger!
RT : It's Match Day today at Drexel University College of Medicine. Good Luck everyone!
I will it s these damn allergies
sure thing
It always looks perfect, as long as you are looking from a distance.
I may not be the best, but Ill be my best for you...wait fuck it! nevermind.
multiple choice men
pacing. pacing and more pacing.
like the technique used at the time was not rlly protected but I contact say anything as of now cause I haven't listened
like the new logo! Fresh!
Follow up doctors visit after goin 2 the ER on tuesday
“: Looks like a book I would like to read!” // I highly recommend it.
got that right! #Sacrifice and #Endanger for the cause! Lol
let's get drunk when you are back in Chicago. South side !!!
I thought I should let you know that someone is using your picture and pretending to be you >.>
You do good work, sir!
The Magic City - MIA :)
I love you more.
": When your to busy living your life to the fullest! You rarely can find time to Hate on other peoples action #JustSaying"
OH NOTHING JUST CREEPING ON MY IDOLS(; & YOU!<21 RT : What's everyone up to??(:
its the little things :).
i just saw this.. How rude!
Honored to have been the 1st Latin American host to cover the Behind The Scenes of #SleepNoMoreNYC Thanks to everyone who made it possible
that sounds exciting! Took my ma and pa to Oddfellows today for some breakfast. We had a great time. It was packed!
All you need is love :) Kickin' it at the office until you get here!!! Woot!
study session tmwr same place as last time?
HDone for lunch then back at the design game!
Seriously, is there anyone on this planet Earth that hasn't talked shit about me behind my back?
Thanks Eduard. Miss you guys, and give Mia a hug for me!
SO agree. Best part of my morning, easily: “: This rules.”
thursday is here -- about to have an egg white omelette (how to spell?) in the spirit of jack lalanne... no doughtnut and cigarette today.
Cool use of twitter in the classroom: have students tweet as the characters from the novel they're reading
had to bring up my boy....that hit me hard man. Pelzer is hilarious
do u watch it on ur iPad?
lets see u say that to knucks dro n #TeamFlexxxx
I cringed at riri framing her vajayjay
your very welcome thank you for following me
I think it started at 8 - eek!
a miami heat hug ;) lol
This is why I love abc family <333
Do you guys ever sit around and watch 1D covers on youtube? Many of your fans are incredibly talented!
Calvin is on the cover of Madden 13, looks like the Lions are drafting a WR in the first round tonight.
"Blackmail, felonies, political intrigue, a trip to the zoo, and family therapy." Reading on the Kindle again.
Just connected the dots. The random tall kids that come over every other weekend & on holidays are probably Tads.
Leaving for the Last Frontier in a few minutes here. Alaska, not space. Space is the Final Frontier.
This school year went by oh so fast.
They seem to add breadth AND depth to the inhumanity.
right, you got it.
Did u get ice cream from on of those places?!
Happy #Thanksgiving to all!!
Don't look at 2 weeks or 2 days of ur life & allow it to account for all of ur life -
add me and thank you doll face.
Had to make some tough but necessary decisions today. How was your day tweets?
Happy Charter Day to ; the Mu Nu Militia on the battlefield fighting for the betterment of society since 1976!
“: do u do the online thing too?
Thanks again! Good day all around.
True Love When a Guy Cries for His Girl
I hope Neil Young will remember.
Soo ready for spring...
CBS upfront presentation a packed house as usual.
allergies? Happened to me last year for the first time too.
"Tupac Shakur - Dear Mama" can be found with Easy Mp3 Downloader for Android & IPhone
Need some expert knowledge here. If I want to find out the builder/architect of an old home in Houston, where do I start looking?
I'm so jealous of you.
Our new video is up! Check our Facebook page!
Tell us about your next film
That's my typical day. ;)
Watching this t.v show this gyal face tough like alligator back. Lol:)
RT : let's make sure none of our elected show up on this list:...
I guess he hasnt heard about the whole #ows thing RT I will say again. NO voters care about super PACs. Not a one
Today almost felt like a dream. Movies with , putt putt, hot tubing and trampoline,finishing with old Scoobydoos
my argument is that Man U is the Premier League equivalent of the Yankees. I hate them both for the same reason--they piss me off
How are you celebrating President's Day?! Frugal Philly Mom has some great ideas for family fun!
Offensive to mock fast food workers and force #underemployment on overqualified college grads. #GenY #wantfrieswiththat Thoughts?
yeah, but nobody wants to make out with him :-(
Well that was good timing.
Can someone come in here and help me with this geometry ch. Test./
God made u special and he loves u very much
The Reunion Tour is on!
“: S/o to for throwin a no hitter #ace”. Yeah, kid! Proud!
The best no Comparrison,
Thanks for your tweet Hussein!
FRIDAY 6-7 Don't miss Director #FredSayeg "The Encore of Tony Duran" "Indie Filmmaker" show Jasper Cole
Haha annie called the popo on your asses!xD
Wish Carolina had taken a DT or CB but love making sure o line stays solid.
What up tho
lmfao ahahahahah “ No! No! Fuck no! Im NOT letting this big headed bitch suck me into another twitter war. #janf #bfk #XLhats”
sleepless nights
i am looking forward to go to the NEXT startup weekend!
The dom.com interactive outage viewer is the suckiest game I have ever played. Puteh!
Had an argument with your mom..and you overhear her on the phone telling people her version of it.
we can watch together when you come home!
Something I read mentioned BYOS (bring your own server) as a possible trend. You gotta be kidding. Those poor SysAdmins.
It's time to see who the Real Twerk daddy is!!! Twerk off birthday dinner Friday!!! I will show you what daddy really can do :D
yes there is? tell me gem?<3
#ClassicJokeMonday What does a nosy pepper do? Get jalapeno business!
you need to DM me your info so we can get this shoot rolling finally!
Happy Bunny Day everyone :)
Funny, that's what my adult co-ed softball team sounds like too...
Great question! I'm addicted to naps, but they have not apparent benefit for me.
How is it that even when you don't overeat, Thanksgiving dinner leaves you feeling bloated?
Good to hear from you today, sorry it was one-sided. You visiting the city anytime soon? Clapp and I could get some #nando's 4u
#Youwannaimpressme then come to our #BlacklightPartyOct22 in Dallas w/ and show me your dance moves!
WATCHiN MOB WiVES ^.^
Hell Yeah ! U already know.but aye i work at wendys now
has a high school shadow...that poor kid will learn nothing...
Dem constituencies don't have 'hobble the Federal govt.' as an objective the way Repubs do.
TOMORROW! Backseat Goodbye, Goot, and more! $10, Rochester American Legion @ 5:30. Be there!
I've asked bout yhu wen they told me thangs but, my mind didnt change it, I feel the same whats a life with no pain
okay so through CHRIST, you can birth a cactus! -Philippians 4:13 -Maria Correa
the hookup shots with their hands on their hips are so gross stop it.
Thats what me and my Dad wanted.We have seen some other great collections. But from what we have seen and heard our is the biggest
It is feasible for there to be a dance with life, a innovative response to its intrinsic limits and issues.
Finance me... feed me...fuk me
Sitting in the ambulance ... Dont know for how long ... In Bolton ... #MySunday x
watching a demolition derby!!!!
do not assume more downloads = more readers. Long form is a slow burn. I have Gutenberg the geek queued up.
David Spade is hilarious
CHASINN THE DREAM :P
Tonite the nite I let you know baby tonite the nite we lose control baby tonite you need that tonite believe that tonite I'll be the best
RT : "If you think you can do it, or you think you can't do it, you are right." Henry Ford
Of Fire and Brimstone and Buckshot comes to the Kindle this Friday. Check it out.
you rocked that stage country style last night! I LOVED your performance! :DD
are you going to be at Austin's concert in NYC?
Its cause Im Mexican \_(@)_/
Don’t forget to stop by the #Hillcrest Farmers Market for fresh, local produce to use for your favorite Cinco de Mayo weekend recipes!...
My suitcase left for Jordan last night. Wish I had left for Jordan last night! N says she will send a pic of my suitcase by the Dead Sea...
Give #UWM #SID staff member Chris Zills () a follow for all kinds of #Baseball, #MSoccer and #Swim informational goodness.
dude, you can't deny did an amazing cover of #BOMT ... so much MMC goodness
ALL THIS SWAGG ON ME
Was just thinking the same thing. Halladay's filthy... RT 3-0 vs Roy Halladay might as well be 100-0, ballgame.
Thanks! That looks like a winner.
Can't wait for my office mates to hear me screaming at network solutions as to why my .x domain was denied.
I just destroyed 2 Polish sausages, and in other news, Brian Gotter is a tool.
Yes, I have appeared topless on stage.
is this the new music ??
Church I meant
definitely an academic thing. Not sure if Butler was the first, might come from earlier ethnographies of clubbing
good morning tonya
Cannot believe I'm missing Richmond v. Muncie Central tonight...luckily radiotroy.com will be televising, go check it out
You can spend your entire life focusing on your scars, or proudly carry them with you as you reach for the stars
Thanks! I'm here for a couple more years at least. Time to experience NOLA as a resident and not a grad student. :)
The Presidential social media score: # Followers - 15M; 0.5M Does it matter? Leading indicator?
Addicting my friend
JUST GO BACK FROM TAKING MY LIL GIRL TO THE HOSPITAL EVERYTHING IS WELL WITH HER
Aww, that's an exciting trip! I'm sure he will, too. And the pups will be fine. Human separation anxiety is worse.
nevermind not going no extra ticket. oh well, hopefully next time.
Mesmerized by the colored lights on top of the Chevron bldg outside my office window.
I'm finding this 12-3AM work block to be my most productive time of day.
Fuck the free world
im cashing out
that sounds delicious
Thought at Work meeting happening now in conference room. Be there, or be square.
For 68, Gladys can 'shake it baby'
#YourNotAPotHead if you know that it's YOU'RE instead of YOUR. smdh...
B.o.B. coming to Springfest 2012 at RIT...you want some tickets on the house? Listen at 5:29pm for your chance to win! Shh...don't tell
duh. Honestly we don't even remember what led to that tweet..
: The shift from the industrial past is gendered--masculine industrial era to feminized curation and interpretation.
what if i said that for a beanstalk you have a bodacious booty?
You are a gift to the world, a divine work of art, signed by God. (:
(American Legal Maxim) Do not answer a question until it is asked.
hey! It's been a while since I've talked to you. Hope you're well!
The only direction we see is forward.....
Nice! Of those, I personally own the grey wolf and leopard. I LOVE LOVE them all and its fun to switch it up!
Thanks for trying! I've heard great things about y'all! Look forward to visiting on my next trip to ATX!
Team Don Jr. Obviously.
Somebody had to go
Josh and Jennifer Are Secretly Married. (;
Bet they start crying in the locker room...yall know who I'm talkin bout lmao
Now Playing: Cody Simpson What You Want
sounds like a long Monday
Happy b-day friend!
We won't!!
Ditto RT : I think millionaires arguing with billionaires over money is hard for all of us to relate to/care about
#ThingsUNeed2KnowAboutIslam is that a mother comes after Allah (S.W.T) and The Prophet Mohammed (S.A.W) that's y ur mom is very important
Visit or updated INTERNATIONAL JOB BOARD. Free for all applicants, no registration! Hundreds of companies hiring! www.joborworker.com
On my way to UMBC's Scholar Selection Day to conduct interviews!
I tweeted myself -__-
Vic, you did great on the Ellen show! :{) So proud of you ♥ u are amazing! wish i could meet u someday.-
I mean - it's a little early to be giving her retro chic props, or some kind of vintage pedigree. Maybe in another 10-15yrs.
Saving face must c this!
thanks to our #2 fan christopher edwards for giving it his all at the slowdown last night
Haha you all south of Lubbock are not worth breaking into Desperate Housewives. #ronroberts admits he is a fan!
Can you please follow me I love uu so so much UR MY ROLE MODEL i look up to u ur #amazing:) followme:)14
Officially hit the wall this afternoon...lack of sleep last night is to blame.
FRIDAY! :D gonna get down on friday :P
RT I just ran a Bernanke word cloud and it looks like Roubini.
Flying to SD in the morning! Finally going to be reunited with my peeps ;)
The Pistons are playing inspired basketball.
Saw a commercial for chocolate cover strawberries and I want them now!
I really want to see on Friday! Who wants to go with me ?!
We are trying the new grilled 'nanner, Nutella and marshmallow sandwich at Miller Park.
Last day of Clinical Apps
Boise tomorrow! We will be at the Assembly of God church! The one with the dome roof!
So many new things coming up CANT WAIT <3 :)
Catch me tonight in Austin & Ally on the Disney channel!
My friend, I happen to live in the (former) strawberry capital iof the world - we're going to get along great!
we finally met! Hey, I'm hearing rumblings that people are anxious for a written review. Have you any such plans?
- I have a TON sista! Scroll down my blog you'll find some...but lots more to come! thx for following
My date, the fabulous Lisa Hodsoll, has informed me that her bladder should receive a Helen Hayes Award! WORD!
#shitfangirlssay oh my god he smiled at me he totally wants me.
Thanks for the follow Andrew. Hope all is well and you're enjoying this amazing
Pop/Rock duo Joey & Naomi is at Council Oak tonight from 9pm-1am
That was the holding cell for the moment but I got sidetracked,
Awesome! Welcome
Thanks for all the #FF love today. Appreciated as always.
Pony Lion. Lol.
Keshawn mad because he lied n now he aint gettin nothing from his girl
Michael Jordan lived in Chicago... D Rose was born in Chicago... D Rose Doesn't know who his father... ... dun dun dun
My body is rejecting its new workout routine.. Workout Hangover again.
I agree. I'm taken by her class/grace. I'm beginning the Katherine and her new Beau campaign..
Simon Cowell -- Not Worried About Britney Melting Down
“ "Many of life's failures are people who did not realize how close they were to success when they gave up" - Thomas Edison”
ok... gotcha!
Favoriting to check out later.
Why thank you ! Speaking of - alumni weekend Sept 30 - Oct 2, I'm thinking road trip! U in?
is such a hipster. And she just KILLED it on stage.
yeah...it just won't be the same :(
haha congrats you proved me wrong ! 😲
Come and enjoy dinner @ D'Noche...such a glorious night...pre-fixe menu for $18.95
US can't tell Iowa its marriages aren't valid. Nor can Texas tell Iowa that. That's what being united states means.
#nowwatching MaryMary on We T.V.
All we are , all we need
RT This Friday at Eck's Saloon: ACDC, Black Sabbath, & Rush tributes. It's a Tribute Extravaganza!
Happy birthday!!! :)
Our very own Dante, airbrush artist to the stars, just airbrushed PaulaAbdul for the WendyWilliams show. Good luck Paula you look beautiful!
Nars Schiap nailpolish back in stock! Allure Magazine editors choice pick!
Our quote was "Be you in all your uniqueness" :) "Be you in all your uniqueness" - and ♥
Ugh! I need a ginger ale
i would have done the same haha, its saturday & 6:35pm :]
I love the song Super Luv by JUDGE ME.
Countdown to Puerto Rico; 6 weeks 6 days 🌴
"we serve the people who need money the most"
I always do! One of my favorite spots!
Race tightening and , starting to follow tweople. They're quite interested in your thoughts BEFORE election.
When I first started to tweet I used to have short conversations with others. Is anyone interested in a little dialogue?
Get ready to celebrate, New Orleans!
Busy Day! RT : RT : Just made it back to Miami and now headed to and !
Thanks!! Glad we could help you out :)
Giving a presentation with #keynote. How reliable is the mobile remote app? Tests fine. Don't want to end up with egg on my face tomorrow.
thanks for asking questions & sharing!!!
Just tapped, Pilot Series Birch Dopplebock (Replaces Aprihop Ale)
Join today (above the Newbury ) from 5-8pm for their winter party! American Flatbread pizza, Harpoon Brews, raffles!
NY is better.
Personal development within. Travel & fitness energize. Music is my go-to. Multiple streams of income.
The 90 year old birthday girl is doing the electric slide right now!
I need intertainment
The fair is happening. Some have tickets. Some make new festivities. Some cannot pay the fare. But it is fair? I wonder what part to play.
The happiest thing in the world when you're broke is finding that last quarter for a dollar
switch me over?:)
Is the price dependent how large you want your audience to be?
Apparently Niall is at a Jay-Z concert.
“ is right near us." Please do and say hello!” Will do - gotta get out of work in time for HH one of these days.
I'm deeply conflicted about this.
#FF Favorites- Thnx to for always mentioning me!
by distracting you mean multis coming in at 200+ right
I'm sorry, there has been a Train Wreck. ;)
Solon When I give a minister an order, I leave it to him to find the means to carry it out
Congrats man. Sad to watch your final show tomorrow but looking forward to seeing what's next.
It's not just what it looks like and feels like. Design is how it works.
Another day to please your customers
Beautiful SF, please stay nice out long enough for me to take my clothes off and get some great photos!
didn't like the performance bro, but been a fan of yours from the start and its NOT time for you to go. Still got a vote here
actually found out it is believe it or not :-)
It's Fat Tire Friday at Fatso's! $3.50 pints of Fat Tire all Friday and join us tonight for lots of Fat Tire giveaways!
So fun to have all these piano teachers on at the same time! :-)
Life is about making mistakes.. Death is about wishing you made more
Seriously txting my bf behind my back? ok bitch.
Just occurred to me that you have a CF8 upgrade lic not a full lic. That's why its asking for CF7.
Wow the new Philips AmbientLED light bulb lasts 22 years!
I know right! Irresponsiblity=fun!
Tommy Rees has only been charged with four misdemeanors. The felony count was reduced. This could easily affect his status at Notre Dame.
I take it personally when a batter is holding anything other than a Louisville Slugger.
I should add that Bret Bielema spoke highly of Sam Arneson following practice. Arneson caught a TD and now weighs 255 pounds.
He sweet
get water!!
Bay Island Seafood 1903 W Pratt St, Baltimore, MD 21223 Cash and Carry hot steamed crabs! Eat up,
Help me with my job! Do you think pop culture helps or hurts the true story of Hindenburg & Titanic?
#thinking hm....
That's some booty! Already outta say it wit ya chest & alright alright alright shirts in my size!!
#Bones finale is miserable. I need strength to control myself.
so it goes
Opinions -> Data -> Metrics -> Analytics -> Insights -> Action. And make SoMe compelling not compulsory in orgs big or small. Yes!
real good
RT : Fall in love with someone who deserves your heart, not someone who plays with it.
boyz+are+back =
Thursdays are the best, thanks to !
real talk tho.... I wouldn't trust a drug free producer with my joints if I was an artist lol
3 days of Altitude Training in Colorado Springs
yeah you need it.
just let it happen boo.
#2012isAustinsYear you know how I know that because he is awsome and I don't ever have to doubt him ♥♥♥♥♥16
Timelines. Interactive timeline by Br. designer CassonMann in Churchill exhibit in Imperial War Museum fascinating & easy to use.
Lined up our last speaker! Have a great lineup for IgniteATL
so how bout this music? I suppose I need to give it a listen huh :)
awesome thanks for the recommendations!
I'll take the blooper.
Fighting is my passion.
We are building.
Going to be #TeamiPhone in less than a week. 
before the playoffs started, would you have said Marc is better? Pau had some tough games but delivered last night
YEAH I AM!!
Besides all this.. I'm missing my wife.. My annoying, aggravating, poop, asshole wife -__- ♥
Today... Smile at someone you don't know! SMILES ARE CONTAGIOUS!!! :)))
Get to see and hang out with some old friends Friday. Super stoked :D
Crashing an elemnentary schools carnival,
Neither are meds. Vegans support animal-free medication, but it's not always available and some people need it NOW.
Wish this cab driver would stop eating n fucking drive this car!!!!!
I'm also working on a model train layout with my neighbor. It's an N-scale layout using the Kato Unitrak system. Peter
Hey , giving Grandma Beverly my phone number was such a good idea. Thanks for having such an adorable family.
Enjoy your lunch!
yum! Are you grabbing dinner there?
watching the new Castle :)
Attack of the Killer Fried Green Tomatoes
but tht would be so fun tho
RT : planning meeting for 20th Anniversary Gala. So Much to Celebrate!!
when did justin biebers voice get so deep. listening to #boyfriend wtf happned?? why am i just hearing this
( LIKE ) COMPLIMENTS ! <3
workin on this song when i record it its gonna b hard for me not to upload it on facebook fwm on facebook Johnathan Based Brown
Yes, hope not. Mine was 1/3 empty after 2yrs. Since I quit, have only taken 2 pills (due to hangover and not Perpetual Wednesdays)
Have a Firehook Bakery Croissant for breakfast!! It's an all butter crescent shaped croissant made from scratch-delicious!
ORDER THE MOVIE! WWW.MYCRACKHEADUNCLE.COM 1 MILLION COPIES UNIVERSAL STUDIOS SHOOT PART 2 IN UR CITY
Never been so excited to put on my PJs and drug myself up.
It's okay by we always have each other, a few friends it's better then crazy ones<3
TGIF Chicago! Join us this weekend DM us for party packages & bottle specials!
my Japanese boss offered me a position to run his new manga/anime gallery when it opens in Spring ;) I've been working on more art
C'mon Jr pitch the ball !
Happy Mothers Day to all you Mama's! Especially ! Such a relaxing Sunday!
Really? What are they doing?
haha totally understandable!
Next time go digital on those flashcards, Michael and leave yourself with 3+ hours to study. Good luck!
you in MKE?
I am a total Bradford Cox fan. New Atlas Sound is excellent.
Curves wit bbabe yaaaaah bitch excellent
will you be joining us for the festival this year?
I can't believe that Creed brings in so many people that they need 2 nights at the Chicago Theatre.
I grew up overseas and wouldn’t change that childhood for anything.
Look forward to hearing updates down the track. Please keep me postd. Good to be back in touch!
imm so Glad you are Feeling Better <3 9
Should be interesting. Looking forward to your tweets from the meeting.
great catch - resending now to fix typo - thanks
Creed, "Higher"
My only hope for this San Francisco trip is that can see Frank Chu protesting in person.
Let's talk about Romantic Comedies - #RomCom It is Valentine's Day weekend after all! #VDay - What are your favorite RomComs? HIGH FIDELITY
Throw in to too and there their to..I mean too!!
There's an alarm going off in repati's office at Johnston hall. THIS BUILDING IS SO CREEPY AT NIGHT!
Inspiring story of a town reinventing itself after destruction!
Think about how many people tour on a bus...usually it's about twelve on board. That's a lot of people hanging around a crash
I miss #oomf /.
Looks like #Growth is going to breed.. loudly
I wouldnt do anything like that.... Unless the girl was a 10.
Wait here's what happened I watched the vid. Asked on the app, then tweeted then con.
Another successful Pastoral Artisan Producer Festival. We can’t wait until next year!
be sure to post pictures of food & tweet about how you haven't had certain sodas in a while w/pics of the cans
Agreed, Abed.
I proofed it like 5 times, so that's entirely on me. It's really MS Word's fault (I'll argue). I bet Clippy would have caught it.
I jus ordered Rosetta Stone Korean
Although my pic didn't win (Jericho) still one of the best Rumbles ever! Very entertaining
Many casting calls are coming out. Prep by scheduling a Private Lesson with Laura Mathis, voted "Best Acting Coach" in 2011 and 2009!
by the baseball field
CANT nd wont be on abdc S7 cuz theyre not allowed to come bak once theyve been on the show. Don't get crazy...its false rumors..
Is Funny In The "Lean Back" Music Video By Fat Joe :]
#SheriffGarcia eating major crow, This is an embarassment for Garcia”and Guthrie will remove him November. Bye bye Garcia. Pack
I miss how Austin used to upload covers every week or so :/
Wow I forgot about that! Im deleting it now!
FYI students are creating design campaigns to encourage students to participate in
Robert Mondavi's widow Margrit is writing her memoirs and publisher promises full and frank revelations about her life with Robert Mondavi.
My kitchen radiator sounds like Daffy Duck!
In our upstairs office, it's Neil Diamond day. We just thought we'd tantalize you with that.
come to rockwood tonight at 8 and ill cover some ... Ill even try to get mm to reprise his role from dazed.
My folks are staying at my house. It's strange to see them staring at laptops in the living room.
im good thank u!:)
I miss you! I am free whenever so just call me my dear...
DFW's takedown of John Updike makes me feel like there is still good in the world.
In a #media planning crunch? Give us a call we can help with your outdoor #advertising!
GOOD! so if we lose, the Sixers lose right?
Had my first LSU orientation today, and I'm excited for my SLIS orientation on Saturday! Time to find my inner Tiger ;-)!
It's 180 days until the 161st ! Whose ready for a cream puff??
FUCK OFF DICK++++
look at the tweet I replied to.
Faces of late night would make an amusing Tumblr.
you better be at the new Albany classic!it won't be the same without your awesomeness your the only reason I'm going:)<3
how come when I check in to the exact same thing as on of my friends, I don't get the same sticker (specific KY Derby)
1 YEAR ANNIVERSARY PROTEST at SAN ONOFRE NUCLEAR ...SONGS Nuclear plant has the worst safety record of all US nuclear "SONGS threat to ...
pickin u up at 11 dropping u off at the mall cannot bring u home from the mall though
"Progress is made when your desired result becomes a second nature activity to perform"
How am i fully awake right now
Sad you're leaving tomorrow, but I will see you in FL so soon!!
#musesocial In what ways do apps connect virtual and onsite experiences? Beyond sharing?
90210 cast members on Talk Stoop right now on NBC...amazing.
hope u have a great day it would mean alot if u would follow me😊😊😜😘
My legs are numb 😳
OK, I've had my fill of drama here. Time to sleep.
We still have March 14 15 18 & 19th free to book Pubs Party's whatever in the states on the way between OH & TX. KY,TN,AL,MS,LA,AR,MO,IL,IN
Watching Ronald Bass speak
San Antonio: The next 7-8 days will be cloudy, humid, breezy, few showers. Today: AM Drizzle, P/Cloudy, Few Aft. Shwrs
of course!:)
There's nothing quite like a wife who brings home a bottle of decent scotch.
We all would.
Yu broke but yu still buying weed
IM. SO GREEDY IM EATN OUT DA POTS.......:D
great, I swallowed a bug. So much for being
haha he looks like a dinosaur!!
smh I'm at work not doing work lol.
Can't hug every cat.
One of my nails just popped off. TF?! Smh
I will. Fina go get it now.
I intend to win it.
It's 's birthday! Wish that nigga a happy birthday.
Hey ! How is that little baby of yours? =)
Fired up a web server — mongrel — and now installing a scaffold for Posts.
"Food and Sustainability" Farm to Table featuring leaders in food sustainability ...
ya boy bout to be up on this instagram
“: I'm such a geek, I send my husband Calendar invites when we talk about doing things. Lol.” <--THIS=ME! lol
Shaving and re-growing our beards for jokes
I'm at my hotel in Ohio and couldn't stand it anymore. Went to the grocery store for fix
I think people should bring chocolate chip cookie cakes to share at work more often.
Thought I saw a bald eagle today, turned out to be a crow with a bagel around its head
Some girls just make me lol
lol wow! Same here lol getting myself ready for finals and have a summer class -_- we have to do something after finals.
Marvel made it. It's called Man Thing. (ba dum tish)
I don't have news access, but scholar is definitely faster if I just want to read a case
I must see this picture too!
Christ, I'll take a band with leather pants over a band that "reads music" any day. Reads music?!?! Bruce Hornsby > Slayer?!?!
Congrats on the Colorado win! Thanks for checking in last night. Let us know if you need anything. ^R.S.
I shoulda ran over your feet....
this time next year we'll be enemies
have a great day!
i thought it was pretty clever too!
music was my first love...your mama was my second.
Pre-concert talk tonight w/ composer John Harbison before Beethoven/Harbison/Brahms. Free for concert ticket holders.
I can't believe channel 8 wouldn't take off dancing with the stars to update us on the storms everywhere. Shame on Wfaa
I can't keep accusing him of doing shit because I been doin' it.
On my way to school.peace out :-) :-)
Want to hear the 2004 97X 97 A To X again? Click here: celestial.no-ip.org/97x
How does Kiss still get gigs?
Hm Same time?
#Marlins bullpen just blew it!
Dear body, I know ur tired and want me to take my ass to sleep. Well no worries help is on the way! And she goes by the name MARY JANE!
We're having a legit meal in my living room tonight: wings, garlic bread, bagel bites, doritos, pepsi, and pizza. Hell yeah.
“: Making new friends and learning new leadership skills is so much fun this is what this all about #DECAlda”
WOW! YANKEES WON! CAN WATCH BASEBALL AGAIN...
Dealing with change is a life skill
#FF13 Thanks to all of you! #I<3Jason
MORE violent?!?!? Uh oh
Disney land will be open 24hrs today, reaching full capacity by noon. I'm sure it will NOT be the happiest place on earth!
MAN I REALLY WANT A MOTORCYCLE!
The movie Selena is sad watching it in Spanish I wanna cry love her and her music
looks like its bike-to-work day as I shared the elevator w/ a whole bunch of peeps dressed in cyclist gear.
Remember everyone once we hit 300 followers will be giving away an Autograph.
The sky is blue. Fish swim in the ocean.
i miss u
i mostly dont get any .
Sometimes the ONLY thing that people see is WHAT you did. When in fact, they should be looking at WHY you did it.
I don't want to hear her wack ass song
Who is Chef Blackhand?
It's funny how sometimes you can knock out your 2 week to-do list in 2 hours. Makes you feel kind of stupidly unambitious.
Let's get it I'm on my grizzly right now
#Twitter Shout out to for the
The empty tomb stories for me are a parable of the resurrection not the resurrection itself.
I want to text someone fun,,, but who? Hahaa
WOW-Baltimore Real Estate Investors Association- $1 DOLLAR "TEST DRIVE" tiny.cc/one-dollar-test-drive
fucking hate my lit assignment
Time to reach back like a pimp and slap a ho.
Happy Friday! Too bad I'm broke and can't do anything, damnit!
Storm JUST passed over Saint Francis, dumped some pea sized hail
All my friends who also liked the Hobbit also like The Runelords and they're making it into a production
I slept for a minute. I'm sure of it.
Great show last night - special thx to all who made it out !! Onward to Showcase next Thurs 5/10 at
#Humaninteraction- if you look close you can see a rope pulling your success behind the people you meet, your choice how you treat them
Second time i trip on the same spot
hah...wait till I have to field questions...I'll make it right clear that I want a question not your 15-20 minute statement
Torres suspension more about being repeat offender vs Hossa hit. Right call by Shanny...
Where is Mike Jones
Listening to my new favorite song, "Glory to God in the Highest" by Big Daddy Weave,
In other news, Brazilian ladies make everything better.
Heading to NM Medcaid officials' meeting w/ tribes re: Medcaid overhaul.
Watching do homework as i do nothing
I'm money motivated, and it's a
Wikipedia is advocating for using Wikipedia as a layer over ongoing projects. For curators, educators, teachers, professors.
i miss the people that i used to talk to last summer.
I don't understand why people cheat, if you're really that unhappy, leave. Stop being unfaithful, its obnoxious as hell.
lol fam you crazy dude your a MONSTER on kit Shreddin the World in Half with them shades on!
"And none for Gretchen Weiners...." STORY OF MY LIFE
AWW thanks boo! RT: Love_Reign looks like a goddess in her avi!
FREE DRINKS TODAY - be among the first 5 people to say the secret word "SURFBOARD" to the bartender and your first drink is free. mahalo
I was wondering if anyones gonna do an article on Bichoff's discovery channel show "the devil's ride" (cont)
Ugh I love so much!!
Its 2:46am in I have the freakin hiccups and can't fall asleep wth
I feel like everyone is betraying me behind my back. Wow. 😡
Everyone please pray for my mom. She lit a fire in the back yard and got 2nd degree burns all up her arm and singed her hair. She's on the
God give me strength to become a better person !
No. Sorry. That will not work as the science used is different for a true autosomal test. It is a reflection of all lines. TY
clearly I left too early!
Yes I agree, but for gay people, he is the first to take an actual stand regardless of if it's fake or not.
who wants to go with me to chedders tonight?? message me!!
RT : THIS: : I wish Beyonce & Jay-Z would get on stage & present their baby to the world like Mufasa did in the...
Babysitting for second day in a row, then back to camp for work yep its official...
My lip hurts so bad!! 😖
That awkward moment when a student cites 'wiki-answers' as a reference in a google doc reviewing the exam content :-s
Leicester push the scrum into next week
Thanks Clarissa! Follow this lady. She's going places!
Did Chris Webber just say that when he hears In the Air tonight, you know its game time?
not going to happen, I'll eat my shoe if it does
It is a fine cause that you support!
TJ Miller, Bloomington Indiana tonight and tomorrow night
A "lightweight" book will sell...nothing too intellectual for tea-partiers, or their brain will explode.
hell yeahh “: Jordan straight up tried Melo & Wade with those ugly ass shoes”
Today seems like a good day to reach 15K "Likes"...who's gonna help a Pineapple out? :-)
Huge Patio Party for Therapy Fridays at Devils Martini Old Town Scottsdale Tonight,241 Any Drink til 12am,No and DJ NYC gonna be jumpin!!!
lol... How else would it b? Just sayin
thank u » ": S/O to for sayin "daughters mother" instead of 'baby mama'. propss.! && happy birthday .(:"
"Love is fragile and we're not always its best caretakers."
Wishing all our DGDG fans and followers a safe a happy weekend. Remember to spring your clocks forward this Sunday for day light savings!!
To fall in love twice a day is such a sweet price to pay
was getting my hair shampoo'ed. Greed creates an imbalance
And the excuse you gave was that it was the only way to remember their name but u called out their name before I answered????
I WISH Y'ALL COULD SEE MY DMs. THESE MUTHALUVVAS IS SICK....I'm going thru my monthly DM DELETION and woah.
Why can't we be friends ?
send me a link to view your team
Either Holy Holy by Wye Oak or New Year's Eve by Tom Waits
how do they get shout-outs!!?
Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill is very progressive; cld set up buses to Charlotte DNC convention for demo.
= high roller ... No waiting for him at O'Hare like us mere mortals
#Doyouthinkitsweird That people talk so much BS bout you, When they only thing they know bout you is your name??
RT he should tho, bruins love bill wisdom we have confirmed with Bill Walton that he DOES NOT have a twitter account.
Ohmygod I love life. I love it so much.
This quote is in my head this morning "Knowing who you are keeps changing like it should"
Yup, pond study for the next two weeks. Lots of shrieks and amazement over microorganisms
Thanks for the follow, Greg!
No one can top that tweet....probably not all week.
Do No Thing. Practice being present. Be at peace with yourself. If only for a moment. And another. There is no thing to do.
Nice. Where's your vacation to?
After hearing Mickelson's hall of fame speech, I'm starting to like him.
sale is still on! $1.99 for a mix1?! Oh my!
Only if the second wrong is righting the first one. How do Castro's crimes right the wrongs of western exploitation?
Hey Gaslamp Killer and Daedalus...Is there a DC show Sunday Nov. 7? Where?
lol I see u
Oh LoL Ok, Damn Technology Has Come A Long Way.. #Salute Fam Thankz For Answering My Question!
L!VE Recording Tonight || Summer Breeze Concert Series || Takoma Station || Tweet For Complimentary admission
I asked about global question...let's talk next break.
thanks for the follow :)
i was actually thinking about getting shrooms this weekend
Happy Easter! Or Passover, or whatever you believe in... Embrace that you need to be back to life again. :)
All that was missing was some hot tea to get me going. The coffee just didn't do it. ;)
[Woops. Sorry for the lack of updates, but I had 3 hour long midterm!] SFR's Twitter is back, starting... NOW.
Wishing some team had hired Mangini this season so #Browns could trade all his mediocre players to his new team a la New York
Due to safety reasons, we rock out with our index fingers at
Steve in a denim jacket? Who does think he is Jay Leno?
Getting fitted today for the RUE 21 fashion runway show <3
I just found out something funny my cuzzo got on the chat line last nite and she pulled some dude ..he thinks she from new orleans lmao
Oracle Accelerates Business Intelligence App Deployment
Our lives r defined by opportunities...even the 1s we miss-from a movie!
Wasn't aware that Puma went to Oklahoma State with that orange...
KLRU-TV's Arts in Context features the VAC's Artist-in-Residence program! Tune in tonight at 7:30 on local channel 9!
Let's keep talking on twitter using #libmade for the next hour. and I will be here!
Wait, no it doesn't-it's just Coltszilla. That's not a real website.
June 4th at the White Rabbit!!! Be sure to come party with us guys!!!!!
We trippy man
Leaning Your Direction! Thanks for The Advice!!
Boyfriend: I wasn't that drunk. friend: Dude you asked your girlfriend if she was single. O.o
No worries. Life is good, even when I'm swimming in misery.
ya'll played lights out D last night, well done gentlemen
Games will be played, hearts will be broken, tears will fall, people will change & rumors will be spread. But life always goes on.
ain't shit homey check out some of the music and videos that I've posted
Thales~ A multitude of words is no proof of a prudent mind.
You are a thief of joy.
Be one of the first to receive Woodfish's long awaited new album slated to be released in Spring 2011. More info here www.woodfishmusic.com
Everything in the world exists in order to end up as a book. - Stéphane Mallarmé
"Best friend is someone who knows all about you and loves you anyway."
I'll b on the Late Late Show w Craig Ferguson on CBS this Fri. at 12:30 am. Set ur DVR's. Please.
Building capacity of #AU missions and support of #UN, #EU. For now these issues need to be addressed for #AMISOM say panelists.
mashed potatoes at 11 is defiantly the best <3
good bubba, you?
We need to make sure that we manage resources at CFSA better.
yeah in the end I think how he handled Ovechkin was best for the team as a whole
Thanks for the shout out!
I love reuniting with old friends. Such a great feeling. :-)
I will. Good luck being silent for the rest of the day!
Last win in the Rose Bowl for the ducks was 1917! Gotta feel for their fans.
#NowPlaying "Motto" by Drake ft. Lil Wayne and Tyga
Thank You<3
#Np One Direction - one thing <3
oh what was inside the omlet??
If your earrings are also a necklace, you're doing it wrong. Stop looking like trash, people of Boulder.
"New furniture, a flat-screen television, decorative light fixtures, interactive white boards,,," Must be real cushy on North Avenue.
Hey, Hey, listen to your heart now. Hey, Hey, don't you feel the rush?.
definitely blur!
aww..made it to my dorm and now im in bed. tonight was AWESOME and I can't wait till tomorrow ;) happy first day of halloween college park!
Dear Fr. Steven J. Kelly The new Photo's looks great, I look forward to bring you the final work sometime next week. God Bless H.Q.
They'll both require daily blow drying and flat irons...
isnt that cool? I wanted to do something like that at one point. very well done.
the sun spit morning in my face :-]
I'm feeling the need for a dubstep concert.
I hate the feeling of a full stomach, why did i eat so much?, i probably just gained like 546688 pounds!
#USWNT - Pia is right... Can't explain missing the penalty kicks. Small difference between winning and losing.
who are you talking about?
Teacher's pets <<<
Im at jumping the hurdles of lib tchers collaboration. Where r u?
#cougartown tonight, #happyendings tomorrow, and my new favorite show #community on thurs (<-- that's for you ). Life is good
I gotta try those.
As someone turning 40 this year I hate you...
We booked the venue and date for our launch of "Samples of Delirium". Stay tuned for more information in the following days. Its gonna be___
Turn up the music.
She ratchet!
I miss you more:(
At t-ball game in Fresno. Not sure any of these kids want to really be here. Brings back memories of my own parents forcing me to play.
will be there in a min or two. Black jacket, black shirt & jeans... so I probably look like almost everyone else, haha.
Appreciate the post share. Enjoy your Monday!
Concrete jungle March 21 dinero dynasty mixtape straight fire
Oh, you breathe oxygen too? Cool, we already have a lot in common!
Our PM, Will Anderson, giving a great presentation at #AgileUX event in
Shockra! no way #Everybodysgotapistol back in Portland ME when I was coming up. I see you're in Philly this wknd, how long?
Come out to Minnesota AIDS Walk 2011 today. We're playing a free all ages show this afternoon at 12:15.
I find it amusing that there's a Kony 2012 poster on the corner where the guy had a naked freakout.
IBM analytics technology helps with MS research - Health Imaging
Heading to the #ms50 start in a cool light drizzle
. and I are creating "Fridays after 5" bingo cards for silly fun. What are you likely to spot on the DT Mall?
I was saying at work
I know #Vegas #blackjack players want some cameraderie but lady, I'm not rooting for your $15 #doubledown to win.
You got me lifted shifted higher than a ceiling And ooh wee it's the ultimate feeling You got me lifted feeling so gifted ... ❤
lo idk its been a while since i been on and i come to a mention that i never text u back..??
ha rlly:p are you trying 2 get him to follow u??and honestly all i did was follow and next think you kno he followed back haha
SEPTEMBER 25 - NATIONAL VOTER REGISTRATION DAY!!!!!!!!
well normal people are asleep right now on a thursday
I can't wait to hear the new album! Love you guys so much :)
Summer is making a comeback this week, but it will not last! Stop by for all of your winterizing needs.
My winter-bread-blues days are almost over! Lyon Bakery is returning to the outdoor market at DC's Union station in May.
Agreed! I missed you this week BFF!!!!!!
Organize Your Photos Like a Professional! Your site will look just beautiful!
i haven't had the urge until i seen her tonight and she said what she said #who lol
Bitter Sweet emotions about Grubb & Ellis bankruptcy / sale to BGC Partners. I spent 4 years there and worked with some amazing people.
It's day break it's def time for me to go to sleep, def enjoyed my night though.......
Wausau is a known for what again?... Why the pitty?
lmfaoooo im wit it
RT Every choice you make establishes your own identity as you will see it and believe it is~ACIM
I'm going to get a back piece tat of Chris Paul shooting over both Gasols.
it's called
Finna get my d rose on at the gym selling my impala today tho :(
TYSM! < RT : #FF Las Vegas, Nevada We specialize in tradeshow and event transportation, logistics, freight, &...
That's what's up!
Remembering today. Thanks to all the first responders and soldiers who fight to keep us safe.
How's everyone been ??
": “: daayyyyuuummm” It be like that sometimes." I understand that
Thanks! deserves all the credit; we're just happy we got to work with them.
that may scare him...but then again if he's scared of that then he may be scared of you...
I'm taking the same route to the city that I did to see :') I miss it so much:(
Realignment. Some need a Chiropractor. I just need Coachella.
Attn speedy runners & shoe fanatics! The top 3 men & women finishers of the ASK 5k will win a $100 gift card to Saxon Shoes! www.askwalk.org
I love mini vacations. Breakfast in Solvang then back to LA to start my new unemployed life!
HAHAHA oh, pedigo. i miss you and your crazy antics!
*barfs uncontrollably at Madonna being the Superbowl halftime show* WHY GOD WHY?
forbidden to follow you :c but it was great hanging out with you tonight! Cam, Zach, and Brent are bisexuals! Remember that!
i cant see it my internet isnt working but im so nervous you make this sound so scary!
heritage days tomorrow? #MAYBE. (:
2day we celebrate the barer of the gate between worlds, the nurturer of civilization, the cryptanite ofmen. Happy Mothers Day Ladies!
Cool. Let me know how long the battery lasts as a watch.
Walk off Grand Slam by Travis Hafner!!! 2nd walk off slam of year. What a season!
did you want to exchange people or beer?
thanks dude!! “: already signed up. They look sweet!!!”
Morning Cartoons
Can this story line lead to Megan getting hit by a truck?
Dinner with my brother tonight :)
In the pub ready for the rugby! #come on Wales!
The Mexican is coming.out of me. Fucking Shakira
Kite? Lol You coming Friday?!?RT : Higher Than A Motherfucker !
when r u comin to Florida vinny
They say don't cry over spilt milk but it just spilled all over my drawings. .. im so upset
Do you know Billy Vera has a new album coming out in the summer?
all day i've been thinking it's wednesday already.
Watching high flyers on wweondemand. RVD vs Jerry Lynn for the hardcore title. From Sunday night heat, I think it was from 2001.
cool. Haha. I didn't know grace liked manga. Cool
Chilis for dinner. Thanks Honey!
tell me youve got a finger up someone booty. And you r eating slushies.
Probably couldn't afford to buy the iPad but I'm glad I did cause I love it..
Is that new Worlds of Fun/Oceans of Fun commercial driving anyone else crazy? I'm talking boycott!!!
follow back
Protip: never come home, eat a lot of potato salad, then take a nap....
That look like some Brooklyn chicks!! Lol
I see, I think you accomodate both basic and power users though. Why not select if clicked, but active if using arrows?
. Sunday she's all ribbons & curls
teaching accounting at a religious college is not an expression of faith! Not protected by 1st amendment free exercise clause
just watch the video. 30min of your life.. That's all.
Heap 60+ yd td week 12 knocked me out of the play off's - brutal!
Exhausted! Just want tomorrow to be over!
Just got my official New Look code name: Planeteer. What do you think?
My sister Dolly is a retired educator who taught developmentally challenged kids, paving the way for their bright futures. #ThankATeacher BA
I was trying to engage Bot Lebowski and Apocalypse Bot in a duel to the death. Looks like Twitter beat me to it
Our Las Vegas students are the best. Check us out for Guitar & Piano lessons. www.hansonmusicstudios.com Big fall push is on!
and increasing the levels of Omega 3 with Rejuvenis Krill Oil has positive effects against memory loss
Happy Passover, Happy Easter, and 3 cheers for the weekend!
burned 303 calories doing 45 minutes of "Elliptical Trainer"
scary that the guys with depression didnt play in the era of lineman built like mack trucks, the future is scary
In my opinion, today's short squeeze in the US equities was evidence that Friday's lows are a major support level. I like BIDU and REV here.
I am partial to the Chart Room, but I have space in my heart for many bars.
theres only one thing to say these three words for you,
is attempting to squeeze 3 cases of make-up and hair products into 1 airline friendly piece of luggage. Hm.....
Give water to the weary by purchasing Faithful Fish apparel which gives to Compassion’s Water for Life fund!
How in-touch is the Green Party of California? Their form letters are in Comic Sans! THAT's how in-touch. (I would have gone with Papyrus.)
Ive been in an airport since 7am. Nothing else to do.
is this suppose to be funny b/c Bob Bach is a man?
I don't want to jinx anything.. but overall I'm really impressed with Mat Gamel's game so far this season. RBI ties it at 1 in the 2nd
Any idea what I can open a .cr2 file with? Raw photo file sent by a client. PS CS4 doesn't seem to like it.
word count deflated my argument.
well, what fuels dreams, like the core message? Subconcious? Daily events? Things that are bothering oneself?
Can't pray for a speedy recovery. Did I say he was dying??? Lighten up. Have a great day.
Thank for looking at www.signatureart - This is one of many celebrity paintings to come
yep just waiting for this day to be over...I need my family right now...
It's very nice to meet you. How are you?
might hit the studio tonight
That awkward run you do when a car lets you cross the street.
they should eat at / Sweet Tomatoes. Great place for kids!!
#followfriday as heard on and - request their hit song "Daylight" TODAY!!! RT
Our thoughts & prayers go out 2 the victims of the tornado damage. We will donate 25 cents to Red Cross 4 each new follower this wk. PLZ RT!
Attempts to finish schoolwork thwarted once again by daytime Grey's Anatomy
yess... i come out of the blue and start saying some deep ass shit
“: Thank god #amc is playing Overboard on a loop.” omg, I gotta get home!
Dang, he got Sue involved & Artie jumped/fell n the pool lol ... Go Mr. Shue!!!
A 2nd-string egomaniac quarterback decides to announce his arrival to the NY Jets @ noon. So stupid I will have to listen
^_^)/ yay! It's still awesome knowing that you're going over there...in style, no less! You know I'm always rooting for ya! ;)
Ouch! and it's a foot up here in Monument...Christopher :-)
Halftime takes too long
just ran in the rain! :D
Why don't you just kiss me already?
Why not? It's got to beat the small sections on long lists that Oxford offers to you otherwise.
I need that one thing, and you've got that one thing <3 LOVE ONE DIRECTION!!!
zap you should follow me !
I just had to walk out to the car in the rain and hail 
All gardening is landscape painting ~ William Kent
“: #NationalSiblingDay love my bro and my sis ” Love y'all too!!!!
If I was a doctor I'd freak you in them scrubs/Sammy Sosa the booty call me Chicago Cubs
Haha How Long Have You Had A Twitter?
Link for the minibook doesn't seem to be working
this is my new teen people magazine. learning all the sexy secrets of the youngens
Thinking about picking up roller bladding
Decided to stop in Durham, NC to see if I could check out
hey I know someone in Indiana who would love a chance to date you!!!!!! :-)
"I suck Justin's..." Woah there. That's just sick.
my fave hair was the slicked-back, high pony with hair as the hair-tie. Uber-original!
we only wish we ALL could have been there! Does do fun employee contests, too? I sense a head-2-head challenge..
Have a good weekend, everyone!
2 hourss!!! bro its 3.03am here in australia im njot waiting till 5 babe make it now <3 the sooner the better follow back x
may 3rd doll .
Thank you Bob Geabhart!
Hey! We need a sleepover son!
RT : "A person and an animal is two different people.." Wise words, Waka. Wise words..
Congrats! I used to teach foreign language at SCPS...
Just saw someone who was just like me a year ago...Boy was I foolish. Thank God I'm not there anymore.
Coffee croissant and the road! Good start to the day!
ladies and gents how are we today?
oh my goodness that is hilarious
I might as well just get a sex change and turn myself in to Emily.
So glad you like the cookie perfume, thank you!
NO MORE FLEAS 4 less! Get FiproGuard Plus same active ingredients as Frontline Plus generic equivalent. In stock now at Lofty Dog.
Pimp N ho' party tonight.. Time to dress up!!
Thanks for the follow! I love the red jeans on your website's gallery page. Awesome styles.
#psanderettememories my fave?? when i bought the Underrated EP😍
I hear thunder nd rain :(
"Occupy Reno" occupied Reno for about 6 hours. We occupied Reno for 30 hours
Not if you have a prescription! Then it's totally on the up and up. :)
what up Long Paper! Lol We out here in L.A.!
u jive turkey lmao !!!
awesome! I'll be there in about 15.
Birds sing after a storm, why shouldn't we?
Pattie must be so proud #turntoyou is an amazing song and your such a sweet son! This is why such an amazing person!
Interested in ebook service pay-per-use, but link didn't work! Do U mind retweeting?
lmao i do tht all the time!!!
Love is Love i love my love my love is u so i love u :D
More upsets for !! Loving Michigan falling to Ohio University!
I'm Clean & Dope Like Heroin Soap
Small opportunities are often the beginning of great enterprises.
that's wat I know
If you don't see the roster on the main page, please refresh the page in your browser. This should fix the issue!
lol yeah yeah :-p
can u follow me plez ;) <3
AppNexus is another firm contender to consolidate players in the real-time bidding space.
which class is tomorrow?
Hey WH! Good to see you here when I'm on as well. Best wishes
It is still on. Come out before 9.
Students, with $10 you can be an #ALPFA member w/ cash left over for other things like coffee! Contact your school chapter for info
But you did! Forgot to mention that last night
Watch the Reds Game <3 Dear Mr Cozart, I'm in love with you.
yea Ashley .........I get it haha WOW jk
Why are there no hotels with 2 King beds!!! 2 fulls? Somebody measured wrong.
I'm beginning to think Optimus Prime is the best option right now.
Partied pretty hard tonight with & thanks to
Anyone know any waterfalls in
Tho you mocked your wife for wanting to rent it, you laughed harder than you have in a while. So don't knock the animated panda.
Shaka not so Smart now.
TY ;-) How you doing?
yep... maybe chugging some water will get this out of my system! :oP
there is a ginormous bug in the bathroom and I am not going in there.
I take it back. Do it. I am now an enabler! MAKE ALL OF THE MINIS!
except the ride is much more anti climactic
I'll tweet you after my softball game!!!
We are also on Facebook! Keyword - iDecide2B. Like us and get ready to tell us what you #Decide2B!
- was the t-shirt an XXXL?
I'll have to give that one a shot next time!
Can't get enough Lolla? Start stalking the site this week for 3-day $60 passes for 2010!
Hey Plugging in the SleepNumber bed in my room would really have helped.
Beautiful day at market Lots of Tour de #Carmel traffic on the Momon.
Bought to eat lunch wit an old mentor, friend, n a man who has a prophetic voice on the city and justice issues worldwide.
welcomes to the Twitterverse. Show him some love!
Much needed manicure, pedicure, and hot stone massage...on cloud 9
One does not have to be intelligent to be a popstar. In fact one would surmise that is the norm.
I can't work. Think I'll go out. I want to buy something for anyway. Maybe a sheer black dress? And maybe a mic? Hm...
Attention Library Twitterati: there's a new name for this Twitter account! From now on, we have the Twitter handle
please tell me you did not just rip on easy mac..
If there's one thing in life I've learned that stuck: it's all about location !
Thanks for the RT!
nope it's on Talk That Talk. It just came out a couple of days ago
Guten Morgen! If you're looking for acting jobs, yes. They won't come knocking on your door :) Not many are paid though...
The first of many
it was fun you should've went loser
Easy but very wet :P glad I have a messy truck! Rain gear was packed ;)
Why is dillard in the game only up 5? I thought they cut him
Women 'Invisible' in Myanmar - Inter Press Service
Drinking box wine, watching Batman Returns in 90 degree heat upstairs. Oh what a night!!
I need to get a job so I can buy a mac!
Trying to reach someone at Sales in your office but no one answers the phone. What's the best way to talk to a person?
Hippie Hallow is a great one that is super close. Or we have have bunch of great trails here on property.
The first instinct in a crisis is to act immediately. Just do something. But take the time for a viable plan.
but it is on #CBS online
Good news, bad news
looks like fun! I did something maybe like that to train student consultants about packet routing many moons ago...
It's depressing to look at pics for a house you know you can afford at asking price, but know you can't by the end of the bidding war.
you have to admit that it's a hilarious line about making stouffer's lasagna for a girl you brought over
The awkward moment when your boyfriends mom says "I love you"....
same right now, we use a xerox phaser 8560 but sometimes would like other options!
Delivering beds, blankets & towels to those in need.
Yes, but since her CABG x3 +AVR, it was a worry.
you're smart :)
This HYFR video is fucking weird dude
?spam? Is this a trick question?
will you two be joining us for the screening of "Waterhole #3" tomorrow evening?
that would be good
stimulating. I just told Justine I was skipping class tonight - full day retreat now
Heavy t-storm in Putnam Co. putting down torrential downpours & lightning. Other scattered downpours across Long Island. Roads are wet.
'Take Shelter' is a powerful, powerful movie. "I'm afraid something might be coming. Something that's not right."
yeah i dont know what that means either. Haha if its not 75-80ft though it just seems sucky to pay that extra money for "Imax"
haha what a good idea! I'm not quite that technologically advanced yet but that would be funny! Thank u for watching it! :)
Thank you for supporting Dream Job! We're excited to be part of the family! &Thanx to Leigh
Tweet from #Stutz Artists Open House tonight at Sat afternoon using #Stutz hashtag please
Pop up ads/ messages are not welcoming. I just want to read the article/ get the information...nice if the headline isn't deceiving, too.
#nowplaying Common --Faithful.
Breakfast with Don this moorning!
#ff because he can prove, you can get 5 meals out of a pack of Ramen noodles, entree and desert
Anyone else sick of the cold and dreary winter? When is it spring??
your a dumb ass
Happy New Year's Eve! Hope you're ringing in '12 with great food, family + friends.
Wherever there is resistance, there is the chance to learn, work, and grow.
Finna put n a few apps n see what I can do
haha ok good thing I made the cut :) haha
I am in, any time. This is going to be the most fun I've ever had.
that's really sad if you consider I've seen it
Birthday wishes from Brooklyn to wherever you are Eliezer McLean. R.I.P.
So...no skiing to work this morning. Shoveling the driveway for an hour straight took it out of me.
Everyone I have talked to is stoked to get rowdy with the James Gang in the . March 17th cant come quick enough
Summer school should not be during Sumner! :p
why do you have so many haters? Oh wait I know.... jealous bum bitches... yeah that's it!
Looking forward to making some dinner tonight. Operation cook what's in my freezer has officially begun.
You're welcome! Thank you for your support, too! Keep up the great work!
After a whirlwind tour of NYC, I'm back (though still moving a little slowly due to a trip to the 2nd Avenue deli).
haha I thought of you when I saw who FSU was playing :)
Someone looking for some brunch options?
pretty, did you by any chance find my phone in your car?
Divide your height and
Visca Barca! They need to score and score early.
Free coffee drinks at our Benson shop from 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday, April 2 to celebrate Perry Merkel's 36 years.
Vegas for New Years.. This is gunna be crazy!! Got the top off the jeep and a car full of friends with a 3 hour drive haha! We on our way
HEY HEY GO !!! rock it tonight!
Career analogy: You're a tree. Are you in a healthy mixed forest? Getting the sun & water you need to grow? If not - time for transplanting.
cheer up buttercup, you're a catch.
#4DAYS and counting. #BOYFRIEND WORLDWIDE
The International Arts Festival kicks off tonight with a free concert by Grammy award winner Calle 13 at 9pm at La Sabana! See you there!
It needs to be written, if only to have Scully & Holmes butt heads and Mulder and Watson getting wasted together at a bar.
hahha good decision=)
I WISH!!! Sarah has work tomorrow night :(
I love that people have the guts to stand up against injustice
Don't be sorry! I don't want to be the worst at anything! :)
Check out our new Workout of the Week Tab on our Facebook page! "Like" this post if your a fan of the Workout of the Week!
Bieber has inspired me, made me cry, made me feel special, made me smile & laugh. But most of all, Justin Bieber made me a better me. :)
As a woman and lawyer, the idea that #caseyanthony and her male atty are "flirting" is insulting. But, now that u mention it . . . .
lmfaoo im jus bein real i cant listen to country,blues,metal rock etc. hell no ahaha
Oh....i live on the east coast...so, its over...
but it is poop or like a runny diarehhia. Off the the shower.
if they got the account, it was solely on the social campaign. i really liked the ad store campaign. simple!
Facing Adversity with confidence, knowing I can be the change, knowing I can make a difference and make things better...
this is rhetorical, right?
and what do you want buzz today????
oh yeah i remember that.. u should post a flick..
about to do a job hunt!!!
already have and we all shoud. Treyvon could have been anyone's son.
How many more injuries, Justin Morneau/wrist...
Thanks again for having us! We loved every minute of it!
So many people in Old Town for Fiesta Old Town Cinco de Mayo that phones are not working!
Does anyone know of a good book about the Crusades?
Diego Milito is forever overlooked in this world. such a shame
I can't decide which color to get ugh!! 😣
idk how to do those lines so ill use these * instead *crying* :"( I REALLY MISS YOU! D':
All that && ion even have to be here !!
Oh wow #Raw is trending. Guess Brock Lesnar busting John Cena's lip caused some commotion
Fertiliser sector expected to post losses for first quarter of 2012 - The Express Tribune
I am all about this. And bk nets season tickets 2013
Thanks ! I have been taking a look there. Some great documents have been posted. Very helpful!
The People embody the power, drive and wisdom to prevail against ignorance, greed and lies. United we stand.
Going to San Diego's tomorrow at Fluxx -- who else will be joining?
Broke a glass...Isn't that bad luck?
Um, Eric Bledsoe just threw it to himself with a dribble, caught it, and started dribbling again. Pretty sure that's illegal
Told myself not to fall in love I'm to young for it 19 wit a lot planned and love is unexpected u just have to kno how to ignore it
My mom told me to walk all the way up to my friends house just to not fall asleep.
spaying aerosol cans.. and eating on paper plates may cut down a tree in the back. just kidding.
I'm at 70 so far!
#IGetJealousOf the monsters who meet back stage..
one thing abt being back in smithfield.....It dont be nuthn to do
Tonight's Foreign Film "VOLVER" (Spain). Starting at 7:30pm.
ewwww they r so disgusting
We still love !
yoooooo GM, Thank You Lord for this WONDERFUL day
Todd's spend alot of time in the box today, playing extra dirty
Writing, editing, marketing three key aspects for successful writing
Man tiny need to keep her money to herself!
in most cases the viewing habits and the level of engagement is different
Yu a hot starr.. no bitch badder!
I pray for you & your family for strength & much more love 4 your family during this time. May Jehovah always guide you&yours.
Listening to
lol I'm on kendall and 107th though probably a little far for you, ask Maria for a #cortadito lol
RT : Living proof! “: Remember, you don't have to have a headache to have a brain tumor. #BRAINTUMORTHURSDAY”
I like cheese i like cheese i like cheese i like cheese i like cheese i like cheese i like cheese i like cheese i like cheese i like cheese
She trynna fuck and i say church!!!
Why would we EVER make fun of Niall's laugh? It's the most beautiful sound in the world besides his singing.(; #StopLLN i guess...
The more I watch LA and Miami ink the more I wanna get a tattoo
For sure. What do you have in mind?
Have you ever noticed a pattern? Most successful people have had hard times prior to their success!!!
#newspaces4learning"adaptation" oops.
2011 is ending send this to the 10 nicest zwaggers ZSwaggers you know. if you get 5 back you must be great.
The 2011 numbers are in: 158,684 #books given to #children in #LosAngeles thru our programs – with advice to
My wife tricked me into watching "A Walk to Remember" by starting it when she knew I was on my way home. These fools better bang it out.
'just tell us the price, son' ...
thanks, i'm checking out your site
thanks. I have a lot of those. More into beer but I'll check out that wine app. Are you upgrading to 4S?
It's all downhill from there, unfortunately. I'm hoping they'll reprise it over the end credits.
the co. we went w/ had A+ B rating, did decent job but not A+ worthy. Tough decision, not much info out there :(
hola come to NY house
HP ump Ed Hickox either favors outside K or he's terrible, those outside Ks on lefties are in exact same spot as inside balls to righties
Honored to have been chosen to edit 's new small-format coffee-table book with 50 powerful leadership ideas. Check it out!
No problem. =)
My guy grab a glass big enough for your thirst and put the juice back... Bout to kill my cart of Simply Orange
Listening to Dave Isay talk about StoryCorps!
I really wish I'd bee in Philly this weekend. Next time!
I was never really a fan of those.
Thanks for following my tweets! I'm looking forward to following you too! Be blessed, Cindy K
-- most likely, even if its only one.....ok you know its coming...what's yours?
By the way, thanks to all the fake porn accounts for following. So cool of you...
See you soon!
Rhianna California Kingbed. I like her when she sensitive and Vanurable
Cannot believe that finish in the Coca Cola 600 @ @
#drunkentweets are on!!!
While on vacation last week I made a facebook page for my side work: follow me at Amanda Davidson Photography!
Gettin ready to head out to hartford for warped tour with Beware of Pedestrians!!
Can I ask why you blocked me on my personal twitter?
#CincoDeMayo is primarily a US holiday. As long as it involves celebrating, big hats, and checking in at , #Belly's on board
It is, I think, an indisputable fact that Americans are, as Americans, the most self- conscious people in the world, and the mos
So, which designs inspire you?
send me a tmobile phone. lol
What’s the best meal you’ve had this week?
Please dont change.
If Fix-A-Flat plumps and fills a pitootie, Y not?
What happened to Google Scholar? Did I miss the memo? No access from the menu.
Did anyone else hear on tonight's episode of ? Way to go Britt!!
thanks for the follow!
Pavement Poetry: Dawn &amp; Barbie
A3 Keeping your head down focused on tasks leads to missed opportunities. Q3 What are consequences of Marketing treadmills?
Good morning to you! Make the most of this new day and bring a little sunshine into it with your open heart and a big smile! ~:o)
Sorry if I didn't get to everyone but I will. Keep shouting me out and I got u...Goodnite
alright ill do that thanks(:
its a crappy thing when another band destroys ur equipment and doesnt man up and pay for it
I miss you💙
Game delayed...time to drink!
nice day for a win, right?
Justin wants us. Tbh.
I don't even know why but I can't stop putting "Lighters" on repeat :-) It's currently making my morning
Sometimes the only problem between you and someone is someone else Sometimes unhappy people don't want anyone else to be happy
mayday parade <3
cooking food
when are you leaving?
Signed it about an hour ago. Sure it will be up soon. For a copy sooner you should reach out to or Thanks
I went downtown seattle the day after and there were flyers everywhere but they all had dicks drawn on them
I'm better off without you.. than by my side.. So now there is no longer...
Reggie Wayne still a member of the #Colts means my jersey is still relevant which saves me like $80
Though in this day and age, that really depends on ur company's retention policy!
That's great! I'd start by reading up as much as you can and making a list of what sounds good. Then you can start mapping!
I should do that. But my work is ... home. ;)
newest one
U don't have DM anymore?
I had a great birthday!
Cleaning my room right now , and i would like to thank all my followers for following me. i know i haven't been tweeting that much but thnx
wants to swap places with someone who doesn't give a shit, just to see what it feels like!
Always a trade off of course, but Hamilton isn't "old" or anything. Nice guy to build around - Yoder would be at 1B maybe.
I was getting arnd to it ;-p
thanks for the re-tweet! Always good to get outside encouragement during reshoots!
#sometimesyouhaveto just accept that it is what it is and you can't change the past
Gettin it in with THE SQUAD
Glowsticks everyone. More bass!
Just getting home my mom surprised me at school and came and got me at 9:30 lol :)))
come to Tobys Sun at 5p if you can!
Our truest life is when we are in dreams awake. ~ Henry David Thoreau
no we haven't.
i cant bring you the coke, but I can send some smiles! (^(^(^(^(^_^)^)^)^)^) there's and army of em! Hahaa Feel better! :)
I know right!! And I'm scared I just lost power!!!!!! Hold my older sisters hand!!!!
I am going to try my hardest to be there.
wow dude i just f***in' saw this o.o damn i'm like months late and shit! :o
Gold's too soft. At least Vibranium. Probably Adamantium.
Get off his overhyped jock! That's the most irrelevant 'historical' stat..
eating beaners for breakfast
“: Yo fans! We see you requesting "Honestly" - and it's coming up!!! #honestly :)” Yay #HotChelleRae fans!
We would! That needs to happen one day & soon! :)
Something Mildly Fearsome this way comes..... Keep your eyes peeled for a big announcement soon!
yes I will throat punch you for not behaving yourself. That is all.
I've been telling people for tow months that no one wants to play Memphis in the playoffs!!!! They are whipping the clippers!
Immortals, meh. Entertaining enough...
No! are playing the same night as the Scripps Spelling Bee finals! This is a tragedy!!
School tommorow. Not ready to go.
we look forward to host your sites! Thanks for the nice words ,
RT Congrats to Creighton for becoming the Missouri Valley Conference CHAMPIONS in both Basketball & SOCCER!!!
Being introduced to Starcraft=playing in the wee hours...
Thank you! And hopefully very soon, only times I'm able to record are weekends during the day because of my neighbors hahaha
Today's prices have doubled! Get half off all orders!
Thanks! A nice surprise this morning!
is wearing her T-shirt right now. SCORE ONE FOR MOM! I'm so damn proud....
they have many new sitcoms next year, they are running out of room
can not even explain how much I needed to hear that right now!
Wesley Johnson
I literally get on Facebook and rush to turn chat off, which doesn't seem to stop peeps from messaging..
Stop being amazed at my telling you that you must be born again from above! - Yeshua
A professional, well designed website, with the right content, easy navigation and quickly accessible contact details, greatly increases...
#Saturdaylibrarian waiting for my storytime group to show up.
I really hope you win
Hope tomorrow is a better day #tryingtobepositive... (notice the trying part)
Help celebrate the birthday of Susan Duerksen by taking back our democracy! Let's sing 2 her @ the downtown federal courthouse & hold signs.
oh. Someone i follow follows u and retweeted wat u said and i found it in ma home page (long story short)
Postmodernism: Messy idealism.
Solid debate there. Think it's too soon. Will be interesting to see how this pans out. New Kindle is what I'm foreseeing.
Work till 5 then Isotopes Game tonight!
People who hate you are just your confused admirers. They cant figure out the reason why everyone loves you.
#1 star tonight --> Timmy Thomas! #Bruins win. Woo! On to Anaheim tomorrow. Go B's!!!
Bwhaha. So that was the elephant in the room.
I'm glad that I could help make that virtual listening possible. Now to put all I've heard into action. Bit by bit.
Be thankful for what the Moms do today they are not perfect and life without them would be so hard...
what will u do today that u do today (that u've wanted 2 do for awhile) ?
Lol he's already wearing it that night ;)
How to Protect Yourself from The Evil Eye by Kathryn Vercillo
Today Should Be A Good Day !
So true but so hard to do!
just saw your mistletoe cover you tweeted mee...lol. great job!
Smh at Kyle Korver smh where are you.....Somebody inform me when Rose come back this is the most dissapointing season ever.
Bring on the storms ☔☁💙
Happy happy birthday ! I hope it's a great one!
YAY The centaurs just took Delores Unbridge!! Power to the people....well, half-people anyway.
Ready to discuss 's FLATSCREEN at 's book club tonight. Just a head's up, I do not take criticism well.
Some guya were wit the gun on that trail robbing ppl RT : what?
84-page packet for tonight's Board Meeting. Thinking it could be a late night.
thanks, they were great! hope to see you again soon!
No one ever eats their own food, we always end of mixing all of our lunches. lmfao , , & twitterless Julie <3
Just how can a game end in a draw?
I had a great time last night @ the Soho Film Fest awards! :)
Nice! RT : YES!!!!!! on contract at #GH. NO ONE is happier than me right now. Congrats darling. Great news!
Anyone ever have a product with an item ordered from - I got an iPhone case and it didn't fit right
At Jewel City Diner with //
"150 'American Artisanal Cheese Displays' at $19 a piece." Brooklyn Flea? No, GSA.
Glad I brought my "London-Tested" umbrella to #sxsw. A blustery day.
Let's get ready Knighthawks fans! Divisional play off game against Philly is sure to be just as exciting as last week. #letsgohawks!
Hot set brother!
If I die tomorrow I'd probably about 20 "best friends"
Utopians feel that slaughtering our fellow creatures gradually destroys sense of compassion, the finest sentiment of humans. Go #Vegan!!
Great meeting with at #GartnerSym today! Reach out if you have any more questions about for #cloud and
Will you make it to our endorsement meeting tomorrow evening?
Looking back at our conversations & wishing we could have them all over again.
Seeing the garden switch posters to the Celtics highlights the bruins are no longer champs. Grr.
oh right! NKOTB right! Tix were expensive ... But keep me posted! Credit card!! Lol
Watch out Knoxville, here I COME!
Your horoscope says YOU ARE 1 BITCH ASS NIGGA TODAY!
Seriously. Xtina. Pants.
Stop Acting! You ain't got shit!
#JessicaSimpson brings in $1 #billion a year.
RT : Hope sees the invisible, feels the intangible, and achieves the impossible. –Charles Caleb Colton
Yay the #Hawks won!
happy christmas time <3
There is tears for his love; joy for his fortune; honour for his valour; and death for his ambition.
RT« Its in their ability to hide their true selves from you but that is only because #Pisces are cautious and shy»
Just think how she feels, being a genie in a bottle and all.
Can't sleep, heavy thoughts on my mind.
Finally im about to get my hair pressed out
The Campo Viejo Reserva shows a nice balance of fruit and earth on the nose, with aromas of coffee, plums, blackberry and tobacco
Just-in-time-model: Access more important than nearby inventory. Cloud-based technologies are the perfect resource.
Can you get Streets & San. to paint lines on the street sometime this year?
Asik's about to get beat up.
Team Wisconsin Select Crane-Schiell brought home the 11th grade state title this weekend!
I envy those with Jersey accents!
what up man, good to hear you guys are up in NYC
Holiday Safety: Purchase lights and electrical decorations stamped with the name or symbol of an independent testing lab – for example, UL
RT : Chris Greene Quartet has a show coming up on 09/16/2009 at 07:00 PM @ M Lounge in Chicago, IL
It'll cost you two grill cheese's.
Want HBO Go on Your Xbox? Better Check With Your Cable Provider
P.S. Video Game Quiz Show been too tough for you in the past? Tonight, it's multiple-choice, pulling from classic episodes!
Why don't we have any power?
Lol thanks :)) RT hey Crystal. happy belated Mothers day lol. aint have yo # to tell ya :(
Being single is shit
Or I could wear my Dress Blues since I will be an honored military guest. ? That would solve the tie issue & up the sexy;)
The key to happiness is really fairly simple.
but i appreciate your Jesus music oh wonderful youth pastor of mine :)
:O I FOUND ONE :) . I love them , well not love but like (:
Budget looks good for EI.
Pres. Obama should stop threatening seniors & soldiers with their pay. Maybe Congress & the executive branch can halt their own pay instead?
So does ToughSh*t inspire you to become a fat, lazy, slob? Or is this a book only for fat, lazy slobs?
I started it... Amanda finished it!) Loooool!!! Hahaaa!!!!
No don't use google you been watching so much porn you forgot how a sheriff's computer works lmao Reno 911
We must! How's the keyboard coming along? haha
Who eva is doing music 🎤 i wanna give a mtf shout out to yall keep doing yall thing FWM we moving...
I didn't expect to give things up but to live by the 80/20 rule-the longer I did it the worse I felt when I indulged in gluten.
Go-to thesaurus website, you're killing me. All my new songs are gonna be about trimming belly fat and zombie makeovers.
thought I knew it but was wrong....
I will not be attending but will be there!
if only I was so lucky
no cause I will partt with you since like the other girls arwnt really my friends anymore. At least we don't talk
Very interested in your products.
Up Early for skating :)
LMV in the house tonight!!!
fell asleep in the hot sun... ouch.
when you know your worth & what you deserve, you won't tolerate disrespect or bs from ANYBODY.
Catching up with :)
Love being played out like a fool
Miss my girl ! #2months :)
don't let those fools get to you. Bmore supports you. Learn from your mistake and move on.
sorry, that Vandy game was too exhausting to lift the cooler. I'll just splash some in the face.
Have a great evening everyone. Hot day today in Chicago. Felt great. Please whoever controls this weather thing- we request more sun.
IF THEY DID OMG. LET ME GO READ IT
I really wish you could see all of the tweets i have been sending you:/ It would mean ALOT Would you mind following me?<3
Highlights of Jazz Fest: Did you know John Stamos is president of the Beach Boys fan club? The Full House heartthrob said so in his i...
I found it!!!! I love mascara B
Spent the day as a style consultant :)
So what would get you to enter a jingle contest? Cash Prize, other prizes? Pubblicity? Chance to be on TV? Radio? Celebrity Judges?
None of that
Austin has Favorited one of my tweets that I didn't mention him in and he has Rted one that I didn't mention him in.. <3
not sure if I'll be home then. I'll ring you.
FOLLOW YOUR FIRST OFFICIAL ARMY! ! #7bars =]
I honestly wish the weather would always be like this.
What do you think are some characteristics of successful leaders?
Who's that talkin in the library?
Must be good, when he give cuts at 6am.
Goigng to school on time feels weird o.O lol
I'm just not gonna touch you anymore.
Yay! :) Coyotes are a tough team for us, so I know this series will be nail-biting! Going to need a lot of to keep me calm.
Age doesn't matter as much as the grade you're in.
Tuesday: The Training Camp Showcase brings the V.P. of SHADY RECORDS (Eminem's label) to NYC. Club Pyramid, NYC. 9PM, 18+, $20. Sign up 7PM-
INTERESTED IN PROMOTING FOR J NOTEZ MUSIC AND XCLUSIVE RECORDS? CONTACT HERE FOR MORE INFO -Xclusive Records
It amazes me how nosey neighbors can be, they makeup shit, just because you don't talk to them
You're a headache waiting to happen.
Hit #CoreMedia for not only CD & DVD mfg, but for kickin custom t-shirts & apparel for your band, cause or company. #SanAntonio is home.
Did anyone else fucking LOVE the movie "Crossroads" with Britney Spears in it? Fangirling HARDCORE right now.
Somebody slap me. I taught the cockaiel to whistle Jingle bells. better than halls of montezuma which was taught while we were on vacation
That's sweet
So much more could've been done
I don't hate you. More for me! ;-)
Thanks for the recommendation! hope to see you soon!
Denemon Junmai Ginjo #Sake. Floral, balanced, smooth, slightly sweet. Melon, tropical fruits, good acidity. 91 pts
I think it is quite dangerous for an organisation to think they can predict where they are going to need leadership
Check out I WANNA GO @ Aaron Davis on my fan page on FACEBOOK Thank you.
I love you Austin!!(: #DedicatedFan <33
someone wanna cut my hair?
again, subjective. he has pitched as many games in a season as Mike Marshall did. He has done everything you think he should.
Happy New Year folks! Y'all have fun and STAY SAFE out there. Hope to see you in 2012!
lol #overdramatic but I love it!
Just followed because sent me here
ohmygosh I want the snooki one!:O
Muahahahaha the filth.
Omg... I had to replace my printer and got a wireless one. I freaking love it. Printing from room to room. Yes little things make me happy
I need to get a shave reminder +_+
if u say so :b
Sometimes I feel like nobody really cares.
Does blocking a number stop iMessage too?
def interested! Shoot me an email to !!
:O WHY NOT!!xx
no no
Thinking back, game 1 is really the only game they should have won. Two cheap goals in game 3, otherwise it could've been in 4
Pancakes and sangria what more could a girl want on a Friday night?!
The #lions are fucking terrible. Haha get smacked dick suckers. Kyle Orton is a bitch too.
Taxes done. I owe federal, like, a thousand bucks. I owe state 14 bucks too.
#Patriots select #Alabama linebacker Dont'a Hightower with the No. 25 pick.The fourth Alabama player selected
Yes I got some
Ooh, I'd love to join sometime when I'm up there. Are they on certain days? Always Weds? Thanks!
Cover me... starting Mason and Dixon again for probably the fifth time.
Bed time, blahh I hate homework!
Made tea.. No sweet n low! Fuck!
Proud to be an alumna of a school that celebrates Friday the 13th. Happy #ColgateDay!
We in the store my sister know every body
I bet I'm happier than you! :P hee hee ": Not even traffic can ruin my mood right now. #SmileyBoy"
I HATE driving with my mom , she's such a freaking weirdo about everything . & always screaming at me when im driving . . .
Hey Rik-keep me posted on your shows! I'll try to check my twitter more often since I'm still not on FB! Thx for all yr help Wed!
Do do do da da da is all I have to say to you.
Whenever the Vikings are a good team (2009) you use the "how many Super Bowl rings" argument.
Do your best Coach! Give me a call sometime.
They are not different.
I will love you like you love me, unconditionally...
Faried is everything that is right in sports
Men's choir killed. Womens Chamber killed. Chamber Singers killed. Concert Choir about to kill. But what else is new? We're Central xP
nope ... Let me negotiate the $2 mill contract for 1 year $1 mil guarantee fills a need
Dm. It is a pleasure to meet you. I just asked your company if they wanted to work together on Academics in the USA.
good! Where have you been today though, texted you a few times and now molldoll is group texting us.
Another doctor visit
Another planning ahead question, as we plan for our re-opening in September. Music in our reading lounge, yes or no?
Hear at 12 PM tomorrow. Also enjoy free yummy refreshments like samosa, pakora, masala tea and sweets!
I wish SO MUCH you were in NYC with me...
Just have to win the lottery so we can have a house with view over one of those lakes. Any day now :)
I don't believe in pessimism...If you think it's going to rain, it will. -- Clint Eastwood
no problem :)
Feel like I stumbled upon the place where all the cool kids hang out and I'm the hopeless nerd.
I can officially say now.. I'm moving to Raleigh!!!!
Thank you & same to you! RT Thanks for your RT. Happy holidays to You! #SocialSmack rocks
grilled pizza is so delicious and fun! Have you tried adding cilantro to your bbq chicken pie? Whole new level.
It was great meeting you too! Keep me posted on everything.
#WhenGuys Defend You
Am bored anyone wants to TWEET ? plz
Keeping it going...playlist extended.
Did anyone see Dr. B on Channel 3 this morning??
WISHING AND HOPING MY DREAMS COME TRUE TODAY PLZ FOLLOW ME SELENA I LUV YUR MY IDOL 4 LIFE (: <3 2
I know did u get DM's
Did a shoot today with Thizz Latin & Gold Toes so I have been posting photos of bay area rappers all day
Reminder: is presenting on the Renaissancing of Patrick Leigh Fermor tomorrow. Meet at Everybody's !
We are heading to to meet one of our bloggers and family for well, #brunch. Excited to try the food!
.!!! You have no idea how happy I am to see you and !!
drafts list is no thick right now. Would take me a few days to try everything.
good luck! You're going to own it.
In my #journalism class learning why #badnews seems to dominate. It's too bad that this is in fact true.
So I said this on my shoot today: Can the butt rub be in better focus?
dreadlocks just scream dirty!! Wtf is she thinking..take a shower lol
Thongs Are Cool
Why do you hate Voyager? In 140 characters or less. ;-)
How do you change your profile image while in iPhone
Whenever I get sick, I have an existential crisis. #WhoAmI? #WhyDoesMyHeadHurt?
Thanks, James!
I got it on me right now I ain't gotta borrow it.
Get back to the gym work off all the drinks and food from the weekend
follow me (:
It's a bad sign when one of the panelists falls asleep during the panel...
It's a wonderful day. A shame to waste it indoors!
A quick reminder that it’s not to late to contribute to my campaign! Contribute right now online - bit.ly/oAs3ds Thanks!
I am so JEALOUS!!
Our bills for T1 circuits (220 of them) look like the mailman drug them behind his truck. Musta had too many Xmas cards in there, no room.
"Be careful who you give your heart to. Because when you give your heart to someone, you also give them the power to hurt you"
Gotta get into the bonus early #Mavs Let's GO!!
Want to solve the employment problem? Give every new business that hires and keeps 2 employees a two year Fed tax exemption!
r u high o/s its ok we wont judge you
any time, buddy.
That's what I've been going with this morning (Argot). So far I'm reasonably satisfied.
Hope smiles on the threshold of the year to come, whispering that it will be happier.
Hitchhikers guide
This photographer is looking at these model pillowcases like he's hungry!! o_O
Did it pick up the Chinese?
Good decision, now you'll never misplace your phone while looking stylish
Tweeting on the plane. Like a boss!
About 6 hours to go. Takin a nap to #rest up for this game.
wow, that sucks!
Every Monday is Rotary. Scottsdale Rotary Club has 175 members. What a great group to be a member of.
SO TRUE. ugh.
I'm glad u had a great time with the tour! I will be sure to let my colleague Steve know. Which part did u like the most?
I Love the part of Twistter on Monster Ball , Why you go??? I LIVE IN PERU ♥.♥
haha, yeah. I've seen it a few times where it says its from him. I just know it from a speech a different band has in a song.
is the man!
Top attractions at #mariners game: seagull swarm, hydro race, the wave
that's the best from your Cena column? Come on BR WWE page gives stupider comments than that.
Tom was staring the fuck outta you (;
Ha! That almost made me do a spit take. #Witch LoL
RT : HEAT ADVISORY- heat index just under 100 degrees - keep cool, seek shelter in AC - hydrate sensibly
From Lavery? Awesome! Let me know how it is.
u should follow me cuz I say cool stuff... Sometimes... Well not really. Sorry for bothering you. :(
When life gives you a hundred reasons to cry, show life that you have a thousand reasons to smile. - Unknown
So tired, I'd swear I was jet-lagged if I didn't already live here.
open house 4th floor Leavey Center. Be there or be [_] (that's a square).
Facebook really looks foolish now due to that Google smear tactic. And now they deny it. But the PR admits it. Zuckerberg is incompetent
The beauty of disappointment and never-satisfied love
Love the enthusiasm and support! Unfortunately, our rules prohibit issuing press releases in connection to the contest.
RT : Pray to God, but keep rowing toward the shore. -Chinese Proverb
Jessica Simpson: Post-Baby Bump Will Her Salary Jump?
Can't wait for the sept "#Brewers overcame adversity" storys. Everyone who thinks its a lost season, please remember 2011. Stop being silly.
Madonna's stalker who had escaped from a mental hospital was just found in the LBC too. Oh, were you starting to feel safe?
Shew.... just took a huge shit in my bathroom
“Unselfish and noble actions are the most radiant pages in the biography of souls.” – David Thomas
I WANNA THANK ALL THE PIMPS AND PLAYERS FOR SCHOOLEN ME ON HOW TO PLAY THE GAME :)<3
Lmfaooo": If you ain't got the cake , CAN'T PLAY WITH THE NOOKIE !"
your gf looks like a burnt bird.
Monday is here! Crazy busy!
Being a part of HISTORY! first ever #EDCNYC AND ILL BE THERE!
We won't need to wait for Matt Taibbi to die to call him a douche. He proved categorically that he has no class what so ever
If you want I'll send you all a print
Someone please tweet me !!! In class and I'm board !!!
Hello Twitterverse! Have a great, talented friend looking for a sports editorial gig in San Diego - LMK if anyone's looking.
got a laptop for christmas (: desktop days are ova !
": Bitch was #TeamOKC last night now she say she #TeamHeat" these chicks just going with the flow..
don't every look at Lefty like that.
omg, i can't wait till i get my license.
Watch out NY! I'm coming to take over with a little help from cuz he's been running you for a minute. Who gon' check me boo?!
: my man. Were you on stage at that point? "President of the Nick Lachey Fan Club" Ha! Whatta night.
"An ounce of mother is worth a pound of clergy." ~Spanish Proverb
you're juance, twice, three times a lady. and i love you.
I see a new one.
great event in chicago. was nice to meet you. drug a friend along who enjoyed it as well.
I'm so so so so so so so so so so happy it's summer
which kinda fruit are you? ;)
Rocking out to Veruca Salt's "Volcano Girls"... once a rock chick, always a rock chick...
yeah sometimes, not a bunch though, i got commitments now, you know?? lol
bitch i'm the shit, bit-bitch i'm the shit! repeat it to yo bitch, tell yo bitch i'm the shit !
I listen to such sad music.
RT : Buffer Tip: Did you know you can drag your profile pictures on the Buffer dashboard to reorder your accounts?
did it live tonight...did you?
Great keynote by Pam Sherman, the Suburban Outlaw at
STAY CALM AND RAISE THE JOLLY ROGER.
I remember that too!!
The long journey earns its destination.
Sometimes I really wish I didn't have feelings. SOMETIMES.
Alamerain, one two three.
maybe,maybe not
yes! I will happily take care of that problem for you! ;) tummy pretzels
Thanks for the follow! See ya...
But if i dont have a friend to spazz with i have my Panda and my internet friends/people for that
There is not competition. The team here go follow:
goofing off as usual
My ballsy prediction ... #ChrisDavis will finish with better 2011 #s in an Os uniform than #Reimold, #Pie, #Andino, #Scott and #Wieters ...
May is Women's Health Month! Smile ladies! (and don't forget to brush)
"Like" Truffles Catering at the Belvedere's facebook page between August 1 and August 31 to be entered to win a tailgating package for 20!
Towel-dry your hair thoroughly before using a blow dryer. You'll save time and avoid damaging your hair with too much heat!
#ProBowl tomorrow!!!!! So excited to see some of my boys representing the #Broncos in the #ProBowl!!! Go #AFC!!
Love bravely, live bravely, be courageous, there's really nothing to lose ;) x Jewel
actually i think it's supposed to be: whiskey, elevate, whiskey, ice, whiskey and repeat ;)
unless your the mother of a ucon or butler player you know that game was BBBBAAADDDD!!
Ok, but you have to take some of mine, lol.
folks u kno we ain't playing w/ these soft ass Milwaukee niggas...
Companies, please stop instructing your employees to bug me about taking your survey. It's a huge turn-off.
where the official studio's @ in columbus, OH? I need to get in a booth A.S.A.P. Dope Musik
ive been on since friday
What a week! So glad it's the weekend. Even though I won't be able to relax, at least I'll be able to get somethings done that I wanna do.
O brother where art thou, Shawshank, and tombstone are my top three. All about brothers.
Haha, you know he is currently plotting his demise! Wait, I think I should be the one plotting his demise!
My birthday SUCKS. Smh..
thanks for rubbin it in.I just finished Googleing how to play a guitar &I didnt learn anything. U need to teach me
they sing them good though! Thats why i love it!
good to hear! You look beautiful in your profile pic.
lesbians should not be allowed to buy dildos... you made your choice
Went to the eye doctor and got a new prescription of contacts. Now looks even more beautiful than before.
Idc Wat no one say my mind can cheer u up if u follow me lol
you should come to Chicago
Hey you have a really great mobile interface for your collections!
What's happ'n hot stuff!
#inplainsight Great final episode. Thanks for a great 5 years. Haven't felt this bad since M*A*S*H ended its TV run!
damn I thought u were joking about Hawaii lol that's wassup!! Yeah it's gonna be getting hot af here soon
Correction does much, but encouragement does more
tell em your lesbian works everytime
Playoff basketball doesn't mean you completely change the definition of a "foul." This Miami-New York game is getting ridiculously bad.
Awesome job Rangers!!!
Preparing for tomorrow night.. Cant wait to hear everyone's sets
I want you girl, and I need your body right here.
Glad I'll soon be a member of
Thanks to all for the Rts/mentions! Feliz Tuesday to all!
What happened when the cannibal bit off a missionary's ear? He had his first taste of Christianity!
I miss my future husband so much.
Your God's got No Cash. -Jed Broitman
I am always amazed when MSM picks a Black Church leader to speak for ALL Blacks on LGBT.
Wunderkind is sitting pretty in my office. No big wigs in there tho. Looks like he's facing the windows stroking his rifle.
Congratulations U of Maryland eastern shore. NCAA women's bowling Champions. 2012
You got all that from a drive-by? You really are an amazing reporter! Safe travels.
ha! I don't disagree. I think Mew is in the studio now working on their next record.
ive got some things in the works so it might not be too long!
hi im karen and im an ACON. will you notice me?(:
Don't play with me
Good Afternoon!!!
wonderful Ameritti Semifreddo and pumpkin olive oil cake! If you are in Westport check them out!
Exact half way point between Xmas and Valentines Day - heard that makes it National Hug Day. Give someone you love a nice big hug!
I'm doing well! Looks like today is a rainy crap day though. What did you guys get up to yesterday?
Abo to get up and get some money!
love ur flow would love to meet up with u if u still in the A
I know & I appreciate it, just been really busy & of course i'm just giving you shit.
Enjoy the pink mood lighting!
So jealous.
I'm a "politico" this week... joining my dad for a meeting with House of Reps Majority Leader Eric Cantor.
we don't, but we might be able to point you in the right direction, I'll check with the folks here in the know :)
Evidence is slowly becoming my new favorite subject!
go hard get the fuck out my bedroom askin me question
It's crazy how nervous I get when I give speeches.
Commodore Matthew Perry or Chandler?
We must play the game of life fearlessly,letting go in each moment of the constraints of our past.
Can't do everything at once.
happy FOR NO REASON
Big name pizza places have lots of commercials, we've got lots of yummy restaurants
my dear,it is sold at the store (& they haven't provided the recipe). A mini-restr inside the grocery store,kama zile za nkmt.
"I prayed about it, but I don't know to which god."
so since i dont have a phone i'll just tweet at you. Where are you bra?
Misread an email subject line. It was, "Amazing Bathroom Redos." I looked at it and thought, "Amazing bathroom rodeos?!!!"
A: We do a lot of things with a lot of the free clinics, we're working with mayor's office on a project in Church Hill
If you cannot work with love but only with distaste, it is better that you should leave your work.-- Kahlil Gibran
Dear #Orioles, thanks for the hope!! Please don't break my heart next year!!
Writing 500 times in cursive: "I will not be jealous. I will not be jealous..." :)
his sexiness hypnotizes us and turns us into crazy fan girls... 😳
“: Watch me get into a car accident now ..,.”
I'm so excited! I just had two lines then minute thirty cut it off. But it was my first time and it will be better next time
you know the world is coming to an end when Paris Hilton is the voice of reason.
Welcome Back Students!
Fuck they three real talk that's all they Finna get
HELLO to you too!
Bioinformatics analysis using G-nome Surfer in today's Neuro 200 lab
We all have one...what’s your least favorite workout/exercise?
#ignatius recommends asking #god not only to take away our fears of rejection, but even to send us what we fear most.
idk! I hope so though!! I'm kinda grounded so I gotta wait to get off from being grounded!! ):
Changed my username to something Linkin Park related. It's temporary but I like it.
RT eats pussy with chicken
My Swagger Is Just Out Standing...That's Why Niggas... #CantStandMe!!!
I knew you were a bot!
Hey do you know exactly how the yelp filter works? I have a lot of reviews filtered for our clients.
almost done almost done almost done....
Awesome! ~?shelley?~
So I've decided to go visit #Hawaii and for my birthday this year!!
Phone glass replaced!! Looking brand new. Life is good. Happy birthday to me.
Pastors, leaders: Time to redefine or relocate. Watch for your free report.
I woke up feeling like shit.
being a photographer, I am gonna go hunt for that moon! Happy Cinco day Mayo!!!
Excellent hospital scene talking to Denise. You are one great actress!
5 year old just finished reading me the Lorax. It was important to her and that made me proud.
": Lmfao Bill Cunningham be having some crazy people on his show it's worse than Maury lmao."
number 1 sign of being a hipster: saying you hate hipsters. welcome to the club, sean.
btw gossip boy is now an app on mmy phone. I click it and it goes directly to ur tumblr <3
Oh he's an early model. We didnt do the homework. He sheds like crazy. You have to make sure the shedding's bred out of them.
Sometimes you just have to ... AAAAAAAHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHHH!! OK, now I feel better. :)
yeah, gonna be a couple weeks though babe :( hit me up next week?
powwow'n it up
Ugh, ugly crying. The Notebook omg.
#SignsAPersonCantCook when burns microwave popcorn
implus soccer shoes
Apparently there is an Australian billionaire who's going to build the Titanic II...did he not see the movie?
It sounds like fun, I'll def try to make it! And I'll see you tomorrow FOR SURE! :-)
Thanks Bianca! Did you herbal chance to read the first two on Roquefort and St. Nectaire?
omw to work and telln my friend about the game last night.. she jus told me to calm down cuz im gettn heated jus talkn bout it!
very good. Has comedic parts as well as a good baseball movie. I am also biased as an A's fan.
lol no, I'm not. Last week of July and first week of August I'll be down there!
makes total sense. Yeah, we've seen it used by a lot of ecommerce sites for good but bloggers seem to find interesting uses too.
Will do
hello stranger!
You ever that
Homophobes suck too. And anything manufactured by Coors.
How is Ian Darke taken seriously by so many?He's constantly way over the top. Annoying.
Misspelled museum goer as museum gore, whoops! Funny / awkward typo.
A #BFRandomFactoid - today in 1932 the Motor Co. debuted its V-8 engine.
Day2 #LAPC bout to start. Couple friendly tablemates in and today.
happy resurrection day
That is true!!
Awesome show last night with Tropic of Pisces and Steel Phantoms. Thanks to everyone who came out!
Man, tons of sirens and honking going on outside. Mifflin + Derby Day + Cinco de Mayo + a regular Saturday in
Here's my Ami answer--A kiss on the hand may be quite continental but diamonds are a girl's best friend
Part of the ed dysfunction is the lack of concern by most media entities to encourage ed as they inundate youth with their prod.
Just got a nice call from former Chiefs great Eddie Kennison. Good guy, good guy.
At fremos having a blast!
Q: What's your favorite song? Either Set Fire to the Rain or Rolling in the Deep.
now I really hope Chelsea beats Liverpool for second time in less than week Tue. Sorry mate but again happy for u for Jon.
How can I already be so far behind when today is the first day of the semester? Don't answer that.
finally found our countertops yesterday. $28/sq ft for granite at Atlanta Intown Granite... not too shabby
I don't know if his passing is recent, but sending u love & peace energy for wherever you find yourself in life right now.
Maybe 600 W Chicago will be back on the schedule next week?!?
Im so ambitious
“ Feeling productive is the best way to feel”
Thanks for the retweet. By spreading the knowledge, you are bringing about positive change.
We wish Gordon Beckham could hit like Starlin Castro and Castro could field like Beckham.
Don't worry you will be a Bronco regardless what critics are saying .Ur a team leader
Alcohol ban in Manchester ahead of tonight's match
That firefighter contract was going to expire in June 2013. .
oh yea I love low goal
oh my gosh, yes! ❤ You're too amazing, darling.
When iOpen a pack Of bread ; iSkip the first piece , cause iTs uqly :P
I think so too lol
no problem. Thanks for the feedback!
Is your check engine light on? I'll scan it and read the codes for free
Eighteen can not come fast enough.
#MahoneOnTheView trend it! may see it and smile (:
Be sure to stop by the site and thank the author too! Good luck with your ceramics unit!
Thanks so much for your #FF mention. It's very much appreciated!
Thanks for the follow!
Young Ryan Leaf? RT : So proud of our Freshman QB Connor Halladay tonight, let's finish this strong Wazzu!!
you do realize you're the last person to post on my fb wall thus you're calling yourself an imbecile
y u actin funny
hey thanks man! I just added you to my blogroll!
spot on, Tim. Boring hockey. Touch to watch for even the most die hard of fans
Its my friend birthday today!!!!! please tweet her!! <3
Life is much easier if you also give things up to your higher power
So nice sleeping (or at least trying to) with the windows open! The lovely hum of the ghetto bird always puts me to sleep!
I hate when grown ppl can't handle shit like an adult.
Lmfao , Yeah ! I'm Already Making Scholarships And Shit !
Thanks for the Follow!
lol thanks you too!
We just waited an hour to hear Arnold Schwarzenegger speak (in broken english) for 30 seconds.
Tough Question: Game's I remember for excitement. Tuck Rule. Bears v Card "Let em off the hook". Helmet Catch might win.
Has a new appreciation for LA now that she's seen it on foot and on the metro accompanied by mi 'manita, Pata. Orale! I get it now.
Great senior shoot 2day, just got home from rock girl casting call shoot & in 5 hrs we'll shoot children's 5k at #millerpark!!!!
i dont get it... Is it Adeles song? Lol
hi! have done :)
me and went in at wal-mart (y)
Damn, if I wouldn't do just about anything this side of legal for tickets to 's DC concert in May. Come on Universe!
There's nothing I can do, A total eclipse of the heart.
It's a classic #DoctorWho kind of day!
Anyone tried Oh Fish yet? We hope you love it!
Happy World IP Day! :-)
Got a linkedin invite from a DB professional I really respect - made me feel like a million bucks.
Wine tour in session! Lompoc goodness
Rebates. Don't you just hate 'em? There is is nothing I want to buy that has a rebate attached to it. It's an exercise in frustration.
Just finished writing up story on a cool Portland project---providing books to the homeless. Non-profit---airing at 4pm KGW TV--
lol no u ain't. I see them fatties running free.
Looking forward to unlocking my Meepos badge...
The mind is everything my friend.
Just saw Warren sapp eat his bros fries at the heat game. Nasty. Gonna teach him oneburger fry etiquette...
yup, eggs are done, not Nintendo eggs tho.
Loss of Suggs for the season...horrible blow for #Ravens. On the bright side, wait...no bright side.
if you need prayer come to Prophetic Activation Skype meeting this Friday. starts at 10pm add my Skype name ( Carlos.Bello507)
Taking matters into your own hands is sometimes the best thing to do..
It sure is refreshing to have a couple days of sun!
need to watch the devil inside with
I saw the movie with you and ving rhanes where you played an assassin, you were gangsta, I loved it!!!
Still can't believe Manchester City are Premier League champs. It's a sad day in English football.
making 1st 2012 decision. skipping first sunrise in order to make early morning first 2012 phone calls. nighty night.
I think my 2012 look will be "lord of the dance."
got it. I would be completely okay with going as a fan too. I'll look at flights tonight to see if it's possible :)
Was reading article about Toyota recall & saw content targeted ad "Toyota.com/Recall - Toyota takes care of its customers..." Smart buy!
Thanks you have some sweet shirts
Cant wait for prom!!
What is your favorite tool (downloadable program or internet app?) for a #usabilitytest?
hopefully i get to all the Up All Night House Party with my friends <3
it was yummy :b
you have too much to do to work an unpaid internship.
Why do you doubt me..
Austin pleasee follow me I love you (:
OK CLT, ticket booked!
I love it, too. Interesting about the human body!
Thanks! We are honored to have Elizabeth on the list!
i need to go south
N Andy it's gone I'm done watching the game! The fact that nobody hit Millwood drive me crazy !
Getting an email that I have a new #twitter follower is like waking up on Christmas to presents & candy! [squeeeee!]
My mom is taking me to see "Chimpanzee" today after school. Can't wait!
I'll be there!
I think NBC did ABC a favor by having Palin on today show. People got to see how much better ABC is. Love their pet segments
Thanks for showing us a good time last night, To Kill A Monster and Marysville!
#FF (my deepest apologies for overlooking you earlier)
Wishing we had Emancipation Day off like so many others in DC. I could really use another day at home.
O. M. G. finally got clickable profile links on new follower notification emails! KALOO KALAY! Web 1.1 Beta here we come! <3 <3 <3
The Silk Tie likes Dr. Gonzo! he also recommends getting wasted with a tie on, it's pretty sweet. thesilktie.com
I'm sure you did great friend! :-) His grace covers you.
Just because you have money , doesn't make me stupid! or does it?NAY
RT Now time for Session 610: MOAR DIGITAL RECORDS NAO. (Note: may not be actual/official session title.)
“ what's the catch !” Lol theres no catch my Mom Sells it but shes not Anymore so shes giving it away.
Enjoying the view from our seaside hotel on the Baltic with two of our favorite people in the world. Vacations in Polska rule!!!
yup! hey friend! thx for the RT :)
BEAT LA!
six and a half minute mile isn't that hard. Push hard the first and last quarter. You can do it.
Persona non Grata => Unacceptable Person
what about the one after the one after the one after the one? Singularity?
Stop fucking fourteen year olds.
I like to call it...observation ;)
I KNOW
+1 #shutthehelluppierre RT : The best part about these West coast playoff games?... no Piere McGuire!
gotta say that Metasexual by Joydrop = one of the greatest albums of all time.
RT : Congratulations to Gore Verbinski for his Oscar win on diecting Rango. He's directing THE LONE RANGER here in New...
that's exactly what he said in the car when I told him the news
Bye bye little kid c;
Wondering why Jack White isn't automatic #1 at alt radio makes me wonder why I wonder about alt radio @ all.
A year after starting Paleo, my counts are off the charts excellent! It really works. When will medicine catch up and admit it?
I just got off the phone with someone who used the word "fooey." What's your go-to substitute curse word?
What does it take? How do you make a difference? Do you have to resort to stealing to get anywhere? It just seems hopeless
Kochs' father did business w/Stalin in Russia, building their rail system. Yeah. The Kochs are commies & like to PROJECT! :(
Big-ups to doin' it real big for the Ravens fans and charitable organizations -- Dons at their finest. Mega-
Grow balls and whatever ever problem you have with me solve it don't tell your little friends to text me insulting me and calling me names
We're all tickled you're here!
I feel honored that you're following me - lol!
Nothing will ever be attempted if all possible objections must first be overcome.
I'm pretty sure I would pee my pants if I ever got to meet Atticus Mitchell <3
Um, yeah.
What? I had no idea that guys did that.
I have GOT to go home and play FIFA now
can I get a follow and a retweet from the best hall of fame ever?!
Stick to my own style. So, you don't know my profile.
That sneeze needed to happen bro
not that i dont get it in for the blondes
MBS MID-DAY: Grinding Near Best Levels Of The Day
It's always refreshing to listen to an entrepreneur with a sense of humor. thanks Ben.
loving friday already! its been a long week im ready fro the weekend!
You are most welcome on the follow :) Hope you have a great night!
Wish I could join the #Little5 festivities this week but instead I work and have school
Ok now I'm sick of ppl asking me wht school I go to or whatever, damn it I graduated.
I want adventure in the great wide somewhere.
hahaha yup I know. I can't even remember what I put in, I think it was one of our weird monkey stories hahahaha
Just bought my Earthquake preparedness kit...sure feels like it to me
Teaching rookies how to use twitter <<<<<<<
''a prophet is never a prophet in his own hometown''
that awkward moment when its 207 & im not tired #atall -.-
oh okay. That clears it up. Congrats uncle! Even if it is Mexican..
I loved when you and Brian Golden were on KMPC!
Btw, did you vote in my latest poll yet? I don't do polls very often so I hope you'd cast your vote :D
You let NY down
Follow mee !! C:
I really gotta start focusing
"I'm a product guy." - speaking at #shorenstein center
amazing morning with - loved Paul's presentation - thank you!
wanna see how fast I delete that tweet
Awesome! Thanks
“: My flight to Newark from KC is delayed. Thankfully my connecting flight is late evening." CC:
Ah so angry. I will now complain and have no one care what i say.
Thanks Arthur ;-) RT : : " Great session, gents." Seconded!
hope u rooted for KU
Just saw Chagrin Falls Hardware on the ABC nat'l news. So great to see how the community pulled together to save this NEO business.
You're a bullshit friend
thank you!!
too funny!!
Pregnant/breastfeeding women should eat fish, but avoid the fish with high levels of mercury: Tilefish, Shark, Swordfish and King Mackerel
That awkward moment when youre in a meeting with someone and realize the last time you saw them was when you made out on the dance floor.
There's def been some better days!
Thanks to all supporters! Day 3 of the wailing, we are wrapped!
Just as soon as I finish Imagine (and I'm 1/2 way through Cialdini again). Too. Many. Good. Books. :-)
Dream chaser 2 >
We have a spot for you in the next issue...hit me
Great Night. Great People. Welcome back :-)
august 20th...it's coming!!
had a great time talking to businesses yesterday!
The struggles you went through made you the person who you are today.
There's about 4 weeks left of school. It's gonna be a busy 4 weeks
Incompetence and doctors offices. Can I just get on with my day please?
Your illustrations make me happy, they are all so fun.
Thanks to all participants in today's CampusHelp iSem ft ! If you have questions about CampusHelp email !
I need wifi!
Thanks for the heads up! Can't wait to give another listen to one of my "highlights of the year".
Is there anyone there that can give some advice as to transportation from Seoul airport and/or accommodations near the Expo 2012 site?
Thanks for the kind words and for sharing my latest blog post. I appreciate the support!
An essay an two power points dew by the end of tomorrow...
Have lots of #liesgirlstell tweets tonight... Upset about someon... something? :) Btw - added your wii # - still need to play! :)
MJ died at 58, Whitney at 48, JFK at 38, Amy Winehouse at 28...Justin Bieber is almost 18... I'm waiting for it.
I'm living in temple though don't seem bad
I'm so bored listening to one direction n I'm still bored
I'm so in!
My least favorite food to eat after smoking a fat bowl is now packing peanuts.
Shit. They do that all the time with us...for fun.
ohh wow ! That's beautiful! Like you austin?;)
When we are scared and anxious we tend to eat because chewing helps; make a nourishing meal & chew a lot. Focus gently to quiet your mind .
"become a better writer" to improve communication.
forgive and forget but don't forget why you're here
Nobody takes this class serious
the best time to ambush a guard dog is to kick him in the face while he's taking a dump... Think about it..
why don't you follow me ?
R.I.P Snoopy :/
I miss the years when my biggest problem was acne. What do u miss?
Happy Monday! Hope your week is as exciting as mine promises to be.
I always have such a hard time making decisions
Welcome in the Summer with a stop to our shop! Just a short drive down Federal! Tell your Friends! :)
Watching Martin lol
It's only Wednesday...
Fine by me... when I'm not home.
You know I love and miss you. We need to chill sometime :) bring that girl w/ you
I want Beavis and Butthead's new season to start.
yup - both.
"I wish it would rain so it could wash the pain away"
I'm so curious to see how this Lou Reed/Metallica collaboration will turn out
All I ask is for my family to be a little supportive & they can't even do that 4 me
I've heard it's beautiful there! Watch out for the kangaroos lol
Very tired but want to start Thomas the Rhymer before bed tonight.
Tough biz! ;) You headed to SXSW this year?
Tom Cruise is a fine ass white boy
lol I miss your gay ass
plus you are captain of Spur's twitterverse, you can support whomever you want in other sports and be alright in my book.
yes sir, last thing I want to do, but i'll be there playing charades with the rest of the class. Are you?
A big shout out to Niles West! Have a safe Prom. Please pass on the word.
Seriously. Get yourselves here. You'll regret missing it. And I'll reduce the price ;)
tell me about it, I have heard I need to get used to early hours for this whole baby thing.
Remember when hundreds of people chanted "Abolish the Board of Trustees!" on #N28?
#saicSATS Erin Gee speaking
Windsor is actually better than I expected
What romantic activities do you like in Louisville? Tweet us at
Sitting with my IsiZulu Crew.
Happy New Year from Kirby Howell! Our resolution is to read and write more! What's ya'll's?
Seriously good day. Easter bunny, family, food and a glorious boat ride.
Funnel cloud reported by spotters just with Annandale Storm.
E-Man, hope all is well on the right ( correct) coast !!!
My dad would always say, "If you're gonna roam with the lions, you gotta be able to soar with the eagles."
Very nice. Gotta get back up there soon.
Owen Wilson Returning to Action Movies with 'The Coup' - Hollywood Reporter
I know! Who knew "free" could be so nom yum yum? =0)
4 months without phone service. No follow up. Still getting bills. On my 8th call about it.
It is much easier to apologize than it is to get permission
Haha true I just assumed we were still shopping TJ Ford daily even if he's crept back from JOB's doghouse.
Adam Levine, Melissa Etheridge, Raquel Castro, Beverly McClellan & Jared Blake are trending in the US!!!!
": #Libras hate being surrounded by negative people, they'll always do whatever they can to escape.".
And you're entitled to that opinion, my friend!
Or lose a game!! RT : Hockey is the one team sport where one player (goalie) can single handily beat a team!
RT : Help us reach 2000 followers! Follow/RT for your chance to win a $100 AMEX GC!! Winner announced once we reach 2000!
Is it appropriate to include "cut the crap" in student paper comments? fwiw he really needs to cut the crap.
No offence basically mean "Im going to insult you, but dont get mad."
Or keep salt handy. I get them all the time.
aw love you are so sweet!imyyy too=(
Yeah, this may damage viewership. No one's going to watch all 3 hours and half the time will be spent recapping.
If you support helping homeless you or abused children ..please follow me.
Had a good writing session the other night!
Hey there, (ktdUugWffnirt6), thanks for the follow! Hope you're entertained by what you read here!
went to Redlands East Valley High school
- Obama supported gay marriage for 2 reasons: To regain the youth vote he has lost. 2. To acquire Hollywood's endorsement.
Just came across 's daughters princess certificate signed by rapunzel, I guess she doesn't need it to know she's a princess!
As long as the outcome is income :)
Oh fuck you, How I Met Your Mother. Like, and not even for all the usual reasons. Stop fucking manipulating me. This is bullshit.
Needs to visit Seattle. This. Place. Rocks.
o ok hitma phone
yu like ignoring me bc that upsets me
The Reef is now available on instant watch - haven't seen it, read some "middling" reviews middling?
Lightweight bored
Just found out that Girl Talk is playing Music Midtown in September.. Gotta get some tickets asap!!
Off to the mall for a show and then the airport later! Woohoo!
I like calling people boothanggg(: is my boothaang,
The results for this hashtag are amazing.
Thanks! Any help would be great!
Thank you for your support. We like the clean lines and navigation of your website. All the Best!
So we dont end up really screwing up here" J Biden quote of the day. www.newyorktimes.com
oh yes. yes yes yes. whoever made that video is a genius.
There is a blue line train, its sign show "special", I don't know what special. (@ Metro Center Metro Station w/ 9 others)
Proud of the guys who did work this week. in the and in the
S/o to my new follower Dnt be a stranger. :)
Gail, and yet again she blogged anger, indignation, resentment, and rage
That good gangsta beverage! #idothasame'ish RT : #random I can't drink out of a can unless the top is turned
I'm in. Name the time & place.
They can start with checking the calendar :) But hiring you is a better idea!
BRINGING MATT TO COLLEGE TODAY!!!! :'(
Magic city series on starz. Is pretty darn good.
2011: Landed my first job ; graduated from ; met my best friend ; and made amazing friends along the way
Just to clarify - are you talking about applecare or applecare+?
Why is it getting to me so much man...
good!! you deserved it after all the prep you did to make our tweet up SPECTACULAR:)
thank you!
true story.
Thank you! I hope so.
and a baby bird also turned up in inventory
What is lunch? lol .. I feel your pain.
Boo. My mom turned down a guy asking her to dance. I need to liquor her up apparently.
It's an Oasis kind of morning
congratulations 2 you what AWESOME work you are doing. I would love 2 do my part with reaching our youths. Let's coord shcls DM me
Disappointments are just God's way of saying: "I've got something better"; Be patient, live life, have faith.
you can do the same with wifi and and an iPod touch...
EVERYONE GO FOLLOW MY OTHER ACCOUNT --> (: Im trying to get 1.6k<3
I said plenty, get some sleep, ur too easy to beat when ur tired.
"Not me" did it.
"My life is better than yours." lol. that's a cute bio.
love u Vic-y :{D hope u read my Letter
Liberty was the theme that the Patriots fought by in the Revolutionary War and their victory slogan became One nation under God
ACTUALLY, i gave you boobs. <3
New #tshirt debuts tonight at 7pm on TuesdayTees.com ... Be sure to check out the
wut is your problem.
Best place to buy discs for disc golf in Fort Wayne?
what's her name? I wanna have great chemistry with her!
Yeah, tough loss tonight. Turn off your phone and we'll get 'em tomorrow.
N traffic
Dane County referendum f on collective bargaining winning 60-40 percent and Madison hasn't yet reported.
The best thing's in life come at a cost! Are you willing to pay?
ngl, pretty happy its friday.
We love your videos. :) Life is good and everything is in full bloom!
joy. sob. oscars.
literally playing volleyball with balloons in first period while eating cake 😊
Thanks for following ME! haha and my band we appreciate it very much =]
We showed them! RT : Joke's on you Charlie!! You said Kentucky was better.
Congrats to the 2012 Orientation Leaders! So much nostalgia right now.
The CEO of is giving a prezintation at the tonight. Excited to get some first hand tips from the source.
I'm happy to see here on Twitter! :D
I might be the only Florida girl who owns only 1 pair of flip flops. I have sandals, but only 1 pair of flops for the beach. Smh
sup dong man?
Oh. 12 is old. My cat's 11. Sigh. Sucks pets have to get old!
#Weather Bluefield, West Virginia Weather :: 62F OVERCAST
I can't wait to see you on Friday.
Making a denist appointment tomorrow
Should be. Always wonder though when public is voting. They are the two best although Holly is very good as well.
ASO E-board Elections tomorrow! If you are interested in running for a position email by tonight.
Lots of "family" can be found on Twitter, my friend!! It's what #TwitterMovie is about! =D
i want my monro pierced gonna be this year determined
My math book is a Saxon. NO FREAKING PICTURES! That's what I like about 4th grade. Lol
Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over. Psalm 23:5
Loved the list - what a great resource!
Made crustless pumpkin pie to "test" before the big T-day next week. It gets an A! M
Good Morning! A picture is a poem without words. -Horace
You mean like the giant Wall Street baillouts that we paid for? Yeah, the "owners" paid on that one. the owners got paid.
oh no :( i hope you don't
Just looked those up - they would work. Thanks! He wears fancy striped sweats from Boden a lot.
does somebody have a good gif of Austin? i wanna use it at my tumblr.
We are an i library but I hate the nickel & diming. I'm also interested in LibraryThing for Libraries' mobile catalog product.
Zora Neale Hurston~ I want a busy life a just mind and a timely death.
The hardest part of packing for a trip is deciding which teas to bring. We're going to Japan for Christmas, do we bring any tea at all?
Looking forward to Friday! #HungerGames here I come
Fuck this game for real tho
": Strongly Approve: 24%. Strongly Disapprove: 41%. Approval Index: -17... Total Approval: 46%" BOTH thumbs UP
"You have no choice but to like me" --
PokerStars Seven Times the Traffic of Nearest Competitor
dinner at Bigoli. gahd i missed this place haha
My mom will not stop callin my name! All i wanna do is lay down an relax!
pretty good actualy how bout u?
The #Ludwig Book by Rob Cook is useful w/ lots of photos, too. Is there a book (vintage or contemporary)that focuses on #Vistalites?
totally jealous! Starving right now!
OK BYE! BE BREEZE!
I've been waiting so long for you to follow/tweet me! Please let TODAY be the day that you do! Please? Loveeyou♥
Yes! It's a pretty shnazzy new card! All the cool kids have one! :) : guess I should pay my dues.
RT : Great opportunities to help others seldom come, but small ones surround us every day. - Sally Koch
I'm always afraid I'm gonna say something and make someone mad at me or judge me. I try not to care what people say/think about me, but I do
Trying to spread the bug and imagine for the better - part of our initiative at least..
I don't even do this stuff ever.
I agree. I think Chekwa could be a contributor as a nickle back right away and possibly grow into starter.
Aunt Gina isn't enjoying being childless and hungover for "Take your child to work" day.
all the new jordans sold out on black friday
what u need on the graphic tip ?
ugh he HAD to text me!!!
me to man ! You barley recognized me lol :)
Hear TFC KOs happen when the train pulls in, and takes a bit for fans to reach BMO. Plus car traffic. Adjust KO times, TFC.
~ You're such a teacher of faith & witness for Christ. Wen it cms to ur own faith & belief in yourself you're project disbelief
So Laura Fitton and Dan Zarella are on the same team? That is powerful!
OOps. I was wrong.
I have to work late like always I never get a brake
Yay! The Cable guy is here! New cable/internet whole house DVR.
I gotta say, most sites look stunning on the iPad. I (heart) my iPad
I know, I'm excited! I've heard amazing things... I hope he likes me and keeps me around!
but it's for me.
Are you looking for #SomethingToDoOnATuesday? Well E-Villa has something for you to do from 6pm-11pm. Come for Happy Hour and try the tacos!
how great was that win?!
Actually it does-Read the sign further-it's N support 4 #OWS Oakland & brutality police committed against peaceful protesters
it's ok! We'll see you in 2012! Thanks for your support!
Just tapped, Brewing Ruthless Rye IPA (replaces Boarhead Barley Wine)
Don't miss out on your chance to win a Kindle Fire - make sure to stop by Booth 1017 before you leave #PLA2012!
A man came to my door and asked if i could donate to the local seimming pool, suree i came back with a cup of water.
Yo, thanks for following! Your uncle made you do it huh?
Be sure to follow to find out the latest news about the March 15-17, 2013, SoCal RWA writer's conference!
I love that story.
how was your bday?
Congrats to the Oregon Ducks on a great Rose Bowl Win! Record Setting Offense in first Rose Bowl win since 1917 that was so great to see!
In other words, it is an at least 75% uncooked diet= Raw food Diet!
My girls put in work! They train hard, look good & keep it real!
Best of luck!!! Happy Monday.
Hope to see you at the Rox Box tomorrow night!
RT : naive bayesian classifiers are good at supervised AND unsupervised word sense disambiguation (hey, it was 1998!)
“: They won't talk about #fastandfurious because none of them would be as stupid as #CNNdebate”
now following this chica>>
caffeine and blasting tunes on lala - I almost don't feel sick anymore
awe Happy Birthday sweet girl!
got it bro!
Love has the power to transform any situation; you just have to choose to be happy rather than right.
I bet so!! I would love to have that chance!
Been waiting all day to see Major Payne
No need to hate when we can all just "love from a distance" instead.
u need sushi
R.I.P. DICK CLARK
You're so smart today! This is totally the Leslie, Annie M., and Jim Fredal show.
that's good to hear! I've been doing really good. I was gonna text you today but I took a nap haha. What have you been up to?
On nice days like today everyone in my neighborhood is outside, now it looks like the Telemundo version of 16 and Pregnant out here.
Today 1900: Spencer Tracy, Academy Award winning actor, was born in Milwaukee.
Woke up to some interesting shit !
": For any1 2 suggest that any POTUS would manipulate the capture of Bin Laden is outrageous." "Capture" probably not right word
Good morning, Monday! Who's still recovering from St. Patrick's Day weekend?
thank you :)
thank you so much for the support.
Tip your bartender more than $1 for making you a ton of drinks.
I don't even remember
Regular straws should all be replaced by bendy straws. Well, that's how I feel
This dude is seriously not speaking to me anymore, lol! Really?
The key to increasing my productivity is definitely going to be more early morning running.
yo BD is this thing working? Holla at cha boy if it is.
are you enjoying LIFEBOAT? Charlotte Rogan will be at PLA at the Debut Author panel
I have a lead role as an irate property owner in Kevin Baggott's film HERE. Most of this movie was shot in Ireland the rest here in NYC.
There are giants owls at least 2 foot tall in my back pasture. We have smaller dogs. I am afraid. Very afraid...
My naughty cat just got her paw stuck behind our gas fireplace insert by one claw
LIKE us on Facebook. Get the word out about BCBA exam prep. The May exam is coming up. Classes start at the end of March. Space is limited!
Loved the casita at the Pasadena Showhouse!! Wonderful!!
Anyone else notice the flames coming out of Vermes' nostrils.
Your Boy E-Scharpf here - Glad you got to London Safe - when will you be back Stateside?
What do you call a sports pub that loses signal & balloons block TV? FAIL. Missed second #Capitals goal but settled in new bar. Go #Caps!!
nicki knows who lola is..she was cool wit her when lola modeled till she found out lola started rappin she likes no competition
Top Steal: Save 47 Percent on This Chic Mesh Sweater! All wardrobes need a staple crop sweater, and now you can buy a fierce one from Urb
Kinect's launch offerings have something for everyone, even for people who don't play games.
my foot is on the road to recovery i think!
honest outsider view, dose of honesty.. Nuggets future outlook. More likely to make West finals or miss playoffs in next 3 years?
It's official. I'm going to my first professional librarian conference next fall. Kansas City here I come...for the third time!
Which would make me not a whore huh?
If a males urine tests positive
Happy B day to the guy with the greatest hair on this side of the missippi
I want to go home. Soon only 4 more hours. So sleepy!
..had a friend, B.J Sund..caught apparently, in Katrina..so didn't seem to understand what ever happen to his wife and set of twins..
LOL : Alex Rios with a nice tribute to Juan Pierre there.
I once wrote a poem about a swimming pool. It was so deep.
We must embrace pain and burn it as fuel for our journey. - I didn't write this, but I wish I did.
Off to go see Dark Shadows.
84 push ups, 99 squats, 239 crunches ...holy crap.
Too funny! I've asked around, but nobody in my office has claimed it yet. =)
Join and TOMORROW 4/23 at 3 PM EST for #CommsChat! Topic is "Making the Business Case for Diversity"
Oh just wording with friends
National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation...they had 2 others on there, but not that one, which is really on my small repeat list
So sore. Too much gay sex- I mean, fighting, working out, and other manly things.
I was hoping it was gonna say ATLANTIS
Maybe if you weren't a pill head then you could actually eat.
A nigga faded
Cannes Centrale is live and seeking your comments on all things re: #canneslions www.cannescentrale.com
Shin splints =
I need to start/finish this paper before I go into a
Watchin Kings Of Comedy.
I wanna be a Crawley
hahaha you guys are so funny.
agreed! I'm so over this crafty, sand blasted, whimsical & uninspired umbrella trend-It's time for something new finally.
Ouch, is that true band music fans? RT : Something trumpets rarely do RT Tuning - The raising and lowering a pitch...
I love the #PGA leaderboard. Phil, Dustin, & Keegan all tied for 1st ! All i need now is to hit mute so I don't hear Jim Nance:)
as in the Beastie Boys song?
Wow what a drive by wade!
#Obama live at UNC, Chapel Hill - "higher Ed is the clearest path into the middle class"
RT: " Google "Do a barrel roll" I promise you won't be disappointed #StarFox" lmao I remember that shit.
Kayla & I working together is going to be crazy...she already got yelled at for flicking my nipple hahaha
Lost bag and missed train connection much alleviated by remembering that I held a first edition of Jane Austen's Emma in my own two hands.
Clearly you just hang around with the wrong people. Or all my friends are mannequins ... Hmm ...
Thanks for the #seo chat at Great information!
is on point today. Getting me through Monday's at the office is a tough gig but they pull through.
48 Hour Film Project is a week away!
Shit thats more likely u u kno more bout prison than me and u always come out smiling!
See ?! Toldja --> “: thanks for the weather forecast shout out. :) here it comes!”
Quinoa Keenwah ~ Wht fabulous Foodie! Versatile:Noodle (think Mac n Cheez w Peas or Goulash), Cereal (w Soymilk & Raisins), Smoothie, Casser
"Bye little child thing go back to your Barbies and make-believe world..." I would have been like, "YOU'RE TOO YOUNG FOR ALL THIS~"
Dear Mancini judges, i cant wait til the day you're paying way too much money to see me on Broadway. Sincerely, 'not mancini worthy' my ass.
Time travel is so 1980s.
Show tonight @ sauced! bring all your friends and yo mama! Starts at 9.
for some reason i feel you're the only person in the world who if i could prove my worth too as an artist it would be a reality
About to get homee 👍
Jaw muscles can contract with a force as great as 55 pounds of pressure on anterior incisors, and 200 pounds of pressure on back molars.
Hi everyone :)
iphone... soaked
Castings tonight. Tomorrow is another day!
Instead of working on #cataloging homework, I'm inspired to do readers' advisory for my dad using Novelist and Goodreads.
Good deeds start at home. Be good to your loved ones today. You never know how long you'll have them
hell yea ima lakers fan all da way lakers :D did u spend ur money yet?(:
what school is this?
I Love Her Beyond WORDS !
I feel ya!
thank you! Now following you back as well :)
Figures... I turn on the game in the 13th and it ends. Come on Cubs... Triple play to keep this going!
made my day today ! (:
I wanna go to spencer's and get me a shirt...
They said they we needed another social media person and that's what we are working on too...
": One of the PRETTIEST people I follow is >>>" that's so sweet :-)
Of course , im coming over !
Go home :) You probably got wet when I went to your house.
Well, you can just come out for drinks and then go home for sleeping post-movie? I'd be so thrilled to see you.
What's up twitter nation I'm back, been awhile someone hit me up
yes sir. rio wraps correct?
Welcome to the Twitter Jungle Jeff.
Lucky you! Hope you're doing something fun this weekend girl. Are you gonna see The Avengers?
I LOVE ROC ROYAL
will do, thanks a bunch
Agreed! RT : Just saw that group walking down Wisco Ave. Looking good.
They were awesome D: I wish I was in the pit when I seen them though. I'm going to see them again at Mayhem Festival :3
So much else going on tonight.. NHL playoffs, NBA playoffs & MLB baseball. Gotta love the month of May!
AW! HUGS!
you're right. I'm sorry.
going on now, Urban Encounters: SightLine - Motion Art Presentation @ 8PM FREE EVENT outdoors at 14th & Champa in Denver
Well, it looks like I gotta get my machine singing beautiful songs. Pronto!
native communities have no word in their languages for art. They consider it just what u do. Live.
Love is like war: Easy to begin but hard to end.
#SomeFactsYouShouldknow, You're getting confusing and i don't know right now?
Im #Feeling u like im #Blind promise me u won't #Waste my
my wrestler is the undertaker, becuase he the best entertaning wrestler to watch :-)
Would anyone else like a shoutout before i hop in the shower?
Calcium deposits are awful....
Rum Punch
Can u say desperate? RT : Looks like got the official #wiunion talking points. Not about jobs now, all abount John Doe,
Remember, there are two words in life that will open a lot of doors for you. Push and Pull.
totes saw you waiting for bus on Michigan Ave as our bus flew by...so HI;)
Working on a new big band chart on my tune that I debuted on my recital 2 weeks ago: Lit by Lightning for the IfCM big band reading...
Is taste testing Jack Daniels in Lynchburg, TN
"Blake Griffin" Oh yeah. He's not Kobe. But he dunks well.
Spoke to 4 huskies yesterday!!! Lots o'energy - they are learning to be a happy unified pack and live in a team!!... Aren't we all?? HA!
i lost my phone. How am I ever going to speak to you again?!:(
#CODYJAKEUSTREAM #GOLDCOASTFINEST #WELCOMETOPARIDISE shelly from wisconsin i love you soo much cody, i would cry if u saw this! your amazing
Fine stuff! Seems to me this phenomenon hollows out human intention in a way that approaches machine-learned models of human choice.
am I right?
can't wait to read it!
Contact Mojo's World by E-mailing
No Culvers tonight. But someone must've alerted Cousin's subs in Monroe. They closed at 7?!
lol they really do do u some justice! shoot, wat would we do without them
that's awesome I wanna see you in phx but I'm a little on the broke side these days! ;)
Yet it seems like whenever I need an actual big box, I can never find one
#aguyshould always give his girl some attention. if you don't have his attention, someone else does
Ok Oregon... I moved from Denver to get AWAY from the snow!
We have a show January 5th with Maelstroms and Queen Anne's Revenge at R&R Grill! Start off the new year right with some great jams.
At what age do you think you should start stop saying HATERS, I say 18.
I love being on my wireless internet...all i gotta do is sign in to my cpu..unlike stupud NIU's
Scars don't heal when you keep cutting.
Don't get caught in traffic tonight -- make your way to SECCA for the free film "Automorphosis" @ 7 pm. Perfect movie for car lovers.
do they do your hair and makeup before the cocktail parties and dates?
Make your contributions to tax deferred retirement accounts before April 15th to help increase your refund. I can help! (504)891-1970
oh right. I believe I'm a friendly dude. And yeah more eyes, the better!
did u mean to put that on twitter? i think u ment to sent that to ur mom of when to pick u up
Whenever I hear "The Hardy Boys", I always think about the fictional teen detectives, haha!
So far i'm exempt from 2 finals (y)
RT no PMing about your night with Mr. Atlas (SHRUG) details to twitosphere please (-:
First Day on the new job! Not as excited as I thought I would b. Need 2 find my true passion. Love what ur doing or u'll never b truly happy
Thanks! What a nice note. :)
And I think I just heard gunshots.
you're gorgeous. Just thought I'd let you know :)
I only like one song
So much for a defensive stand. Purdue back up by 3. Not looking good for the Jayhawks.
Today at work, a whole family with Australian accents came in. They instantly made my day. I ♥ Aussie's.
wouldn't be surprised if that feeling is world round.
um i left at like 1130ish did you??
emotional and captivating performance on re-pete.
You must do something new to be sustainable. Innovation must be part of the job.
Just failed my citizenship I think didn't know anything lol
Shooting special w/ at Monarch School - a school dedicated to homeless children. What inspiring teachers/kids!
You're welcome! =)
what was it like working with the cast and especially Tyler?
Of course!! You're so very welcome!! XOXO
Just want to see if I still have that morning anchor ability. It's only been about 15 years! LOL RT : THE...
you unknowingly put your life, your heart into the palm of another's hands and saying, here do what you will
TODAY Oz is giving out FREE Mongolian Beef lunches to the first 100 customers between 11am-2:30pm. Hope to see you here!...
Thank you, Doctor!
am I the only one that hears the term #BountyProbe and immediately feels #puckering in my pants???
That sounds like what I need! ;-)
Moiko Records Radio (Cohost): "Time Won't Let Me" by Phil Watson & Robin Lee Field Now Playing
What a lazy day -_-
i followed
tsk tsk just ready to go? I'm already going in!
I still got love for you bra...But if Rose gets that MVP he will be the first since 73' to win it and not be All-NBA 1stteam
#TheWorstFeeling Waste time.
Im sick man pray for my fam...RIP MY FAV AUNTIE I LOVE U!!!! ;'(
Spring time in NYC :)
I'm going to travel back in time 8 years, find the me who decided to install a whirlpool tub, and buy him a beer.
suck a cock
Will do for sure.
the weird part is that ppl our parents age are like thinking that they are still in the game... gross..
RT: I'm really going to miss 's hilarious parody tweets after this election.
Rocking in at the market...
My drug of choice. w
another great year of fiesta coming to a close today. until next year.
...whatever, I'll be in Monaco.
“: The NEW 3R's: Reputation, Repeat Business and Re-Tweeting. Gitomer”
Good to know Thx! RT : Kravet has a lush line of outdoor upholstery fabrics.
Its not out as a book yet, but I'd love to get a review of my online series, The Trivium Proportion. maybe again for the book
Loves Paul Rudd!!
^.^ I like that one, but I totally disagree about bein a hoe !
As long as it keeps raining with no lightning out thunder I'll be ok
A crisp, cold day in Nashville...I love it...but where's the snow? We need at least ONE GREAT SNOWFALL this season..
Answer da phone .....
Great to meet you too; and glad I was memorable :)
you crazy rocket scientist you...
Don't know why I'm more productive at night. Ah-ha...just noticed that Churchill sleeps. Not demanding to be let in/out/in/out. In. Out.
RT believes you can do it!!! As long as "it" is really, really easy.
shout out to team twist
Heard That
yea on facebook
Thanks for the RT and follow, Clenaure. You working out of #TelAviv?
So fuckin rad. I wasn't sure how they'd be live but they killed. Second only to seeing Clinic @ MPLS's 7th Street.
Finnally my favorite song i recorded hitz tha streets on 4/15/2012! Pikk it up on itunes! Listen to full song and pay just $1.99 to buy it!
Day 2 of #scriptfrenzy. Still on schedule. 8 pages done. The two sisters are about to get some very bad news courtesy of psychic grandma.
This will be a super duper tough decision! Both girls are spectacular! It sucks that they both can't go through.
Congrats! RT : Elizabeth () and I got engaged on Cinco de Mayo!
Photographing new items for the shop right now! Coming up - neat new tees, hopefully later today!
Life is a journey ,the path im walking is full of love and music.
NO transition Layups!
;P laser sight Airsoft Gun Ukarms M-K068 6mm Laser Sight Reviews
it's late night over here too! 3am! gotta ask u babe, what piercings do u have? could u list? any new ones u want?
We're listing some excuses we hear people make in a new series of tweets. Don't use excuses! Get fit!
I'll get u all the info in a bit. Fb message ok or email?
So whose turn is again? IIRC, its #MyTime, right?
idk just thinking
Dogs laying on my bed.
This will be interesting to explain. "I broke off the 'L' key on my work computer by dropping a model heart on it."
He didn't cuss... "damn" is in the bible
Our records say Saturday, December 10th.
Wait come back....oh well, at least my team is winning. *eats popcorn and sips cold beverage* lol
thanks for the mentions and RTs: Org #culture friends to know.
Hey Nick, I have soccer playoffs tonight! You think you can help me get ready for it with a few wise words?<3
Painting a white wall white
What's up with Cee Lo's pet white cat on #thevoice? It's kind of random to just be holding and petting a white cat while being interviewed.
Wahi Media opens a new Client Relations and Talent Development office in #Tallahassee!
love Florida country boys #keepin'itclassy
"I'm a cool dude in a loose mood, I done smoked dope and shook hands with the pope." - my 84 year old grandfather
Literally just heard the most ignorant, homophobic rant of my entire life. It legitimately offended me.
RT Any ways doe... // National Hoodrat quote .
What kind of watch is best for people who don't like time on their hands? A pocket watch.
So sorry that Natalee Holloway is dead.(please retweet);
"Your EDUCATION is something NO ONE can ever take away from YOU."
Playing the shit out of it, having fun. But I need to get off from being lazy and learn more characters.
#elclassico #madrid Altintop seems to be the only hole in Madrid's defense.
My new single "Life Not Typical" was on the "Most Added" list on the Billboard chart this week - say yea with me!
thank you! I hope you have a good night too! Fight on girl!
When God is in it, it's not over.
he must think I'm in there. smooth and pale and slender and all.
Happy Mothers day to all the wonderful caring women that have loved and cared for us unconditionally, thank you we appreciate you
Thanks, Dario. It helped that you were a great client. Hope to hear you soon!
Really? You are still tweeting press releases in 2012?
Sleezy Tom Delay got what he deserves. Typical corrupt Republican.
thank you soo much! Yes this the first song we've done together! Soo glad you like it!
I understand.
8 days until we play the Cobalt Cafe in Canoga Park, CA and just 12 until we leave for tour!
Day 91 of 100: I am thankful for re-discovering Michael Shurtleff
Nvm.. I'm not trying to roast anybody
Wis. Gov. Scott Walker says no budget repair bill needed despite new $143 million shortfall projection
Haven't had to shit this bad since I drank a pint of iced coffee last semester.
Happy Hour starts now aka the weekend starts now Milwaukee!
Nothing else i'd rather be doing than laying with 💜
I am in love with
Are you going to his recital? I have two tickets and as of today no date.
it would be great if you would follow me back? Please follow back? :D <3
“: Oh yeah! Lewis & Clark Watzek Library!
Once I stop giving a f*ck about you, good luck getting that back.
Thanks for the reco. I've just been told I "have" to go to Istanbul, I'd love it. So this will be the preview ;)
don't think he is in the building
seems first of the battlefield finalists solving a problem.
Making my baking list and checking it twice. Lots of Brownie Buddy Gift Boxes to bake and package tomorrow thanks to being on Rachel Ray.
Longest #daytona500 ever.
I got you guys. Get to 2k! And let's go caps!!!!!!
#IHOP has Dinners for Breakfast, Breakfast for Dinners and everything in between! 30 menu items less then 600 calories.
SGU took a dark turn with the script and I was disappointed by that. I hope the next space series is a bit lighter.
but bad news for a few....the red neck ideology concerns me
say somethin is perfect you're adorable baby I love you
Unless a funnel cloud has been seen, we are actually in Tornado Watch mode, tornados=serious, please report on them accurately!
Rip quint mac didn't get a chance to tell ya love ya man but you know it's there!!!
im mad at you .
I tried ... I really did
ah. I see. Jumping to conclusions.
Initially turned off by its title (which: rude), My Cat From Hell is a sheer delight.
Christmas is coming! Bring on peppermint season! (Peppermint bark, candy canes, scents, flavors, etc.) Sigh.
JUST BECAUSE IM GOING DOESN'T MEAN IM GONNA HAVE FUN.
that's awesome! what style was it?
Hi Jim! Yes it is, hope all is well!
we're good
: ruin a friendship? Methinks not. Stuff happens!
I also hope all my tweeps had a great blessed Sunday today as well. I hope u all stayed safe. Know that god is watching over you
Mayweather is so Hollywood.
I need to find me a boo....I get tired of being in this house
How's Jackson? We need to catch up soon.
Fair enough! We like Chevy's too. Drive on, drive safe and drive happy!
A Cabin In The Woods is a comedic spin off of the hunger games.
Bahaha! Poor guy! Thanks for the laugh Nina!
Wow! Wait till you see the cool new riveting tool from You're going to want it!
Lover I've just figured out that i've been cheated on:( iloveyou Vicky(:This feeling sucks!and i'ma kill a hoe!
Hm...might have to start taking a public poll.
Ah, yes. Chuck was there.
It's EG's birthday! Give him the best present: get involved in his campaign for LA Mayor. Go to the meet and greet Tuesday night
What the fuck is my sims saying...
Fugg wit my
*tries to read mind* ;-)
good morning :)
those are some interesting selective facts - The college holds two national wrestling team titles; the university holds zero.
wow seriously? I haven't paid much attention obviously lol that's crazy though.
You create beauty with your attitude, your behavior and your actions.
Pissed I missed the #Replacements' tribute at #BoweryElectric with dudes like Jesse Malin & Craig Finn. a lesson to buy tix early
Well, besides almost getting killed on a dirt bike.
"It's the people who have no doubt that every word they put down is gold that probably don't write very well." #koontz #writing #can'tsleep
New avi. Trying it out for a couple days
Exciting news #Popcorn Fans! Our #popcorn making equipment is being delivered today. One step closer to hitting the streets!
hola do have time to rt this it would mean the world babe;)
If you want to fly like a butterfly, don't flap like a crow.
If you worry about what people think/say about you...you'll be forever worried.
Whose birthday today?
Don't trick yourself into thinking it's going to be easy or should be. It won't. There's no glory without battle.
I'm gonna do my best to make that nickname stick.
il2011 wifi very slow and not widely available
Going To Eat With The Fam!(: Might Be Dying My Haiir
How long until they put in Rudy?
I am now!
You were talking so freaking loud hahaha
Has anyone been to the #Gaultier exhibit in #Dallas? I'm debating...
Hey are you free to make 300 bucks from me or not lol.
is so riddled with scammers it's sickening! I may need to abandon it entirely. Didn't have to be like that
oh my god you are amazing :D I love the choreography you made for melanie and marko :D that routine made me cry!!
awww dont worry! Love you too! I've been so busy lately! I saw Ariana in concert on the 28th :)
I don't fancy you, I'm just being nice..
Monday Feb. 6: Professor Skip Battaglia will be leading a discussion of “The Artist” + “Car Crash Opera” after 6:50 film Tix $5.00
If Los Angeles is like an aquarium where you see pretty fishes, New York is like a petting zoo where you have to battle tigers. It's amazing
Be careful of friends who mistreat people who were good to them.. It's only a matter of time before that mistreated person becomes you.
Hello world. Excuse me while I test the pipes of my over-connected life. Why are things I put in over here showing up over there? TW1
Is There Any Plans For A Store To Open Up In Alaska?
Something Don't feel right....
Mr. The Altuve with a Bagwellian DP in T9... AWESOMENESS! Excellent win!!!
BF Banquet quote from Bob L. When asked about meal choice. "If I'm going to write a check I'm gonna eat red meat".
ohh and i like original songs.. not remixes..
- no and not familiar either.
Did you see this one? via
Good morning Tworld. Off to the gym. I am so grateful.
It is a profound (dare I say startling?) statement that Egypt used social media to overthrow their government.
Let's put the past behind us and go far away where no one can find us*
Thanks so much for the article this is a great find!
Linux is only free if your time is worthless. My time is valuable.
Oh wasn't you sick? And let's go job hunting bc I need a new one
you know I agree :)
Riding around with my sister and nephew.
watching the IU vs whatever-ridiculous-other-team game #IUBB of course we are winning.
>>haven't got a chance to listen but I will homie..thanks
we're on twitter! follow us! :)
dont fucking yell ill kill you!!!!
I LOVE YOU :D
Yep RT : “: Your buddy, rocked it! #BreakoutKings ” sure did, thx!
It's way to nice outside to be at work.
#OTGTIPS STOP JUDGING PEOPLE OFF OF WHAT THEY SAY, WATCH WHAT THEY DO!
Waking up but I just want to lay down again.
In the dying evening ~ there is ~ but one path
Today is my #someday will follow me? #neversaynever right? 13
finishing leg 25. Everyone except has one leg left to run.
Had a fantastic time last night speaking about branding your art business at the University of Central Florida.
I wish this worked as well on dudes as it does on cats
having the same problem, waiting on the 5, let me know which one you go with.
Fourth Suggestion, Men are visual creatures by nature so ladies keep this in mind when you plan a romantic evening together.
wait what? That sounds kinda cool
Great to see you there! It was a great event, and a fantastic response. Will be better for the Wine Fest! Be there!
And if I always try to make you happy but you never do anything for me.. guess what? Suck. my. dick. too.
hey alex, u wanna be my 126 follower? the spots urs, just take it! ;)
Great! We gave you some link love. :)
Just took a really good and insightful marketing survey by about my #outdoor activities. I'm pretty darn active! :)
Watching Dog Whisperer with Maya 🐩
Did you see our new photos from this season? Check them out at facebook.com/theSCoopUSC!
came home just in time to root for LA
Like when goes on the twitters
Thanks for the shout out Orlando Sentinel! . 6 days till the big challenge!!!
I need to be at pool, eating some crawfish and drinking some abita!!!
Most people don't look at your personality first, they automatically judge you on your looks and then try to get to know your personality.
#SongsIKnowOffByHeart : Any Drake songs
Live from the Miami Dolphins Business Alliance at Sun Life Stadium ...
I see. Thanks!
thanks for all of your support!
Hello all... Im bored and it means twitter time :)
Just got Home! : ) I need a day to Re-Coup : ) FABULOUS SHOW! Thanks to Everyone & the FHC Amazing Staff, your the Best : )
fair; I'll be the first to admit I'm more ignorant of 's biography than I'd like. But I hope you can understand how
Heading off to the theatre, my friends. AMERICAN GRIND @ Lyric Hyperion in Silver Lake,California. Be there at 8p.m for this hilarous piece!
: Thanks for the tip! I'm planning on going indoor mountain biking later so that'll help w/preventing pain from that too.
Do you think Neymar is going to be a better player than Messi?
Also, I may have been made cynical by my experience trying to get on World of Warcraft when the 1st 2 expansions came out
she's 18. Legal and barely dressed.Seriously her ass is hanging out of that tiny skirt Her mom is out there taking pics w/ her
2011.08.15 #Brewers 3 #Dodgers 0 | Double plays abound / throw in a rare triple play / in defensive gem.
meet flook at your party?
Er, that link goes to a page of camera/ photography tips and info.
I see a quiet Don Draper retaliation coming. Watch out Megan
RT : How did #Marketo increase lead form conversions by 4x? They set up shop at the B2B Marketing "Water Cooler"...
change the thesis, then
Wake up and smell the coffee! Did you know that 1 cup of java(yes the kind with caffiene a day is good for the heart! Yay to Moderation!
Awesome, #Ochocinco with a TD, I knew with Branch out he'd get time, but what a great play!
i actually really did LOL right there.
watching Mexico's Next Top Model drinking hot chocolate (: With my bff <3
"Claire De Lune" If yal sleeping on this, YAL BETTER WAKE UP!!!
If you're going to follow people, give us some idea of who u are or what u do in your twitter profile if you want a follow back.
yes I have. Looks like Tampa is about half way between Orlando and Estero.
Ahh! Thanks. Happy
Do it! RT“: Wanna know where dudes on tour are hanging after their shows!? Follow ”
The White Ribbon is too good
gotta fox wit the SAMe. Sposed to be good for dopamine and serotonin. Or just listen to u god 'dopium'.
Come celebrate Mothers Day right now River Sports Cafe in Dallas!! Live band + hip show!! 5214 S Lamar St- Free parking all night!!
Flavor of the WEAK!!
Playin Meek Mill to 11 with the windows down so he can yell at people outside my car too
yes it is
Cole Adkins our strategic accounting analyst and consultant, has been working around the clock!
the only goals up are the side goals
Omg ugh i needa get this baby outta me !
D3 extends good luck wishes today to cands: K.W., K.L., D.R. & M.H. Also, a sincere congrats to J.O. on an outstanding offer. One & done!
#walkingdead all day
Hitting up the gym!
RT : Spend the last of your Spring Break locally! & sign up for
Already completed our first job: we will separate the items at the EnviroLink office. Now a customer ordered a dumpster swap!
Posting more fine art soon!
Is there such a thing as bad santa porn?
Haven't been able to sleep so foreskin tired but lol
"Don't let the stuggle discourage you, it's suppose to be hard. If it was easy we wouldn't have anything to do"
It usually takes a while. And that's cool.
thanks , I'm cute :]]]] lmao shessssh
Lets go Dallas make this a real series.
Finally have my phone with no numbers. You know what ta doo.
Hunh. Never thought of live tweeting a Louisiana/Texas feast before. ... Gonna stop soon cause I'm getting seasoning all over my phone.
So I told him again how busy I am and then he says "I understand u have kids so I can come by if u want" -_- the fuck!?
With all these running marathons, I wonder if there is "a new mommy who stays at home festival"
Chalmers is terrible...
marathon lines, pushy crowds, inaccurate maps, failing french, "ferme mardi" and fogged over. thank goodness for chocolate croissants.
Soo, when do I get to meet the lovely ? =-) Sending my love from New York.
So tired ;(
Thanks for the retweet! I have a huge pile of these great student drawings to pick from!
Make Up To Break Up !
Sometimes, love just isn't enough.
...Huh? Where did you come from?
Headed into our 11th straight hour of employee calibration. O.M.G. I am ready for this day to be over!
I'm with you on the Mario Tennis. Once it's out, we'll have to meet up on the court.
That's the rumor :)
Thnx for heads up about the account being hacked! We apologize for any messages you received - problem solved now!
I always follow back too. Could you help?
Goodnight everyone :)
My Epic and I approve this message.
Amazing late night phone call from loopy and crazy made my night!
I once watched her in an audition of her own. The casting director, directed her to many different modes and she gave him exactly what he
I love when the UL band has to play, "My Old KENTUCKY Home." They have to cringe!
SRI testing in language arts today
Million miles away
What is it re: Twitter that draws u so strongly 2 the social media platform? Any element in particular capture your attention?
Very helpful e-marketing webinar by Marketing Sherpa. Wished I could have listened to the rest! Thanks for the great info!
Say it's so
Couldn't ever imagine living in that kind of fear, but when it comes to protecting those you love, anything is possible.
The mistakes I regret the most are the ones I have yet to make..
hmm very valid points you make. Perhaps I need to work more on toning down the hangovers so I can have bfast.
China is lambasting America to start "living within it's means" - I'd tend to agree for both America and Americans.
The worst kind of pain is when youre smiling just to stop the tears from falling.
ty! Can i get a copy?
Did Tonner just do the four LOTR dolls or were there special ones I missed?
Jason Marr and Morgan Rowe on KGNW radio at 4:19pm today! Tune in for some Pitmen Painters fun.
Slim Bacon to perform tonight at 6.
BECAUSE EVERYBODY KNOWS IM THE MEANEST PERSON ALIVE LOL
Good and bad weekend. SKC bad, family and Arsenal awesome! Back at it tomorrow
Many asked about terms. DIRECTV already pays Versus more than any independent distributor and yet Comcast seeks a 20%+ hike on that rate
Call me crazy but, I'm still bummed about last night's loss!
To all, we need your support to.spread the word then come out to EVERCLEAR AT dobbs Wed night 7pm, Reminder, Artist VIP cards do not apply.
I missed mardi gras damn it! Boo
No doubt! I need to make more room in my budget.
In other news, I'm now a tweety bird... so sayeth your boys ;)
I liked it
How long do eggs keep in the fridge before they go bad?
still working on it
The coy pond of your dreams.
We're over 230 likes now! Want to help us make it to 250? Share our page with your friends! Thanks!
The weather in NYC looks like its going to be pretty sucky this week! Hopefully by the weekend it clears up and I can do my first timelapse
I love you New York but I need to spend some time away from you. Need a
you in session or skipping this round? I want to say hey.
Def going to the nurse next period to sleep just ain't puttin my head on them pillows probs full of lice or some shit
"Funking for Jamaica"
That awkward moment when شخص مجهول adds you on Facebook.
Wow, Lindsay Lohan is a bad host. Guess I'm not surprised.
A mortgage firm that has originated more than $10 billion in mortgages agreed to be acquired by LendingTree.
a bit more: it's a personal network for making decisions about where to spend time, money, energy, mindshare, effort...
I just shattered the entire screen of my phone :( now I'm trying to use it & I'm getting glass in my fingers :( seriouslyy want to cry
Join me TONIGHT at 9pE, 8pC, 7pM, 6pP for our LIVE Corporate Updates Call 877.313.2651 / pin: 3359756# Free, Unlimited Talk, Text, and Web
PLEASE ROBERT FOLLOW ME! YOU're VERY SEXYY!!!! $
I'm ready to see the #BOYFRIEND video!(:
A lazy sunday !
nobody likes you.
yea hosting
it never occurs me to use private listening on spotify until after i've listened to something i suppose i should consider embarrassing...
Can you follow me i just followed you
So excited for #each1teach1 at Women's Night In
#team80 so trying to hold my #teamB status
lmao...u kno he sound like his breath stank!
A comfort zone is neither good nor bad. You just need to notice when it has stopped serving you. -Brenda Anderson, Playing the Quantum Field
Hey #Memphis people. I am playing a show this Friday night with my buddy and the band Nature Boy Explorer (2185 Monroe-Free-7pm)
i hate it when ugly people say "i need my beauty sleep." bitch, you need to hibernate.
“: uh oh ... that run by Gore didn't help you out much.”Lock and load baby! In the hunt for 7 points in 7 minutes.
Dam, got this gay ass substitute
meaning the contrast is bigger or smaller than you expected?
Here's the lineup of free beer we're giving away tonite: Shock Top Raspberry Wheat, Magic Hat Elder Betty & Pyramid Apricot Ale. C u soon!
Whoa! Time for a charity sell off just like Elton John does.
bow bow bow bro wht up
Aha kool, he doing music! Yall should hook up sometime though
It only took me 2 hours but I learned how to tie a legit bowtie a few months ago. Never return to pre-tied!
don't forget Colts passed on Williams and took Edgerrin James
Hi Bethi, I love how you love me loving you and your tweets
I advise you to say your dream is possible and then overcome all inconveniences. ~ Les Brown
yes, & answer was why focus on one category when talking about an overall fabric?
You sound like a tool. Haha.
Just got back from the Aurora Bridge, packing up and heading out.
Great panel lined up at #LVIMA....so excited!
chilling with the bra
Pretty great night, #sohot :)
That's what she said.
hi how have u been?
There's needs to be more of and less of that bullshit y'all swag fags listen to.
Venue has been BOOKED!! More details to come. Stay Tuned. :):)
Help me plez I like him but he str8 and on the bl
long hold for a brief conversation with the florist. a bit cranky. not that I blame her. happy mother's day.
Anyone have a direct contact at the #DelanceyStreet Foundation? Much appreciated.
Unions are by no means perfect, but they have done a lot for this country.
I love music
Where's my list of last ditch things to get my wife for various holidays I almost forgot? Oh yeah, Dollar Store here I come :D
Delayed! MT ATREX rescheduled to Monday night 3/19 due unacceptable weather on 3/18. Launch decision to be made late 3/18.
Like this status if you are going to see Underoath and The Chariot tonight. I'm so there.
Best scene: my great grandfather's pet monkey doing tricks and playing with my grandmother's hair.
Going to the ? Say hi to from & ask him about NEH grant opportunities.
I hope Doc announces the eastern conf. finals. I didn't like the guys that did the #PhiNJD series
Totally ment to call my dad yesterday and today! Awh crap. Ill do it tomorrow.
I cant make ou love me if you dont..
is that ur hello kitty tatt?
burnin' up burnin' up show em what you got babe you got it baby let it show just turn it up, turn it up let me know whats up.
RT : If you are going to put text into your Powerpoint, it should be big and red - kudos, Trevor Owens
Beyond DNA: Epigenetics: The implications of this for human health are very wide-ranging, as we will see from the case studies we are...
please follow em ? :)
#20ThingsAboutMe I do not like strawberry milk :X
ignore the ignorance doing big things they mad
Good finale. The best team won even though they almost screwed up big time. Looking forward to the next race.
She's fine to but I want you
George Zimmerman has been charged with 2nd degree murder by Special Prosecutor Angela B. Corey in the death of Trayvon Martin
missing SD from Berlin...
i agree with you on that Pauley. I would never to decorative body tattooing of my pet that is just sick.
Why, thank you. I appreciate that. :)
back up and run it over again
RT RT : BREAKING: Pink smoke is rising from the White House chimney.
Vanco 120624X Bulk Cable 2-Gang Faceplate error: either unsupported url or the url is not valid...
its like me having green hair
Check in the car--in the way back, under the seat, or driver's side door pocket. :)
when did i ever say i didn't like Colin?
that's a great story!
The various options that are available for health insurance can be very confusing-take advantage of using a health broker....
are you from Houston? My lady lives in Houston but she is actually born & raised in Western PA. She attended grad school at TSU
oh please! I prob don't know either. Lol
Got the job! Starting Monday. Back to getting up early lol
The truth comes out alittle at a time.
just saw Sue Ward on a CHC commercial. Said "I am a Cardinal". Guess not when she was teaching us Physics.
Excited for 's New Year's party tomorrow!
Junior Seau&#39;s Death Ruled Suicide: Autopsy ... - The Huffington Post
thanks for the follow! Definitely could use some tips...
I'll be back tomorrow 
#21-James Harrison-OLB-Pittsburgh Steelers
I just punched the wall several times...
Peyton and Randy?
Haha. That's freakin funny! Nice
I can have friends dam I hate this boy right now
Hi! Wine & Food Truck Pairing Dinner in last night! Contact Justin Harrison for future events!
We've already learned more in the first 2 minutes than we did all last season, so that's a start.
Lol this late really?? Somebody hungry? lol
lol I be on the same shit
“ Gemini wants for the relationship to be always new and different & so spontaneity and mixing up of routine must take place”
Whoops. *Without spellcheck*, not with. Geez. Hello, brain, can you please work today? Thanks. Love, Drew.
Obviously FB should be their starting point and hub of their social presence, after which they can choose what's next
Corned Beef King Reigns Supreme
I was thinking that too. But it would be nice if their were a Like button on twitter.
hahah, that would have been totally fine if you had been! cannibal corpse is just bad.
Thats why I dont fuck with my own people. They crazy!!!!!!!!!!
It was fun meeting you too! I'm working on a blog post right now. I'll send you a linky. #theremaybebirdpoop ;-)
Can't wait to find clip of Phillip Phillips playing "the stone"...perfect dmb gem to bring to mainstream crowd that is American Idol
; sorry come out tonight
I WILL BOW TO NO ONE
Those girls certainly get parched..
One other audience answer to "most important composer of the 20th century": Phillip Glass
how has biz been?
BOOM : Did I just hear correctly Bryce Harper hit himself in head with bat? And I thought I was having bad luck.
Muhammad Yunus of Grameen Bank is receiving an honorary degree from Emory University this morning
I haven't seen THE AVENGERS yet , I want to see it so bad, why did I have to get sick last friday, ? -_-
Only the dreamer shall understand realities, though in truth his dreaming must be not out of proportion to his waking
RT : "Social networks have increased trust among people, making it easier for collaborative consumption"
So pretty! Have fun!!
Used to live in Madrid, The Carlos V was a Best West. where my parents stayed. Good location, price, clean. Price range?
oh, thank you!!! That's so nice of you. I'm flattered!
Get TAN for Valentine's Day! 9a-2p Buy 1 Instant Tan for $14-Buy 1 UV Tan, get 1 FREE-Recycle your LOTION BOTTLE and get 25% OFF a NEW ONE
Man alot of these celebrities are pushing maximum density & their clothes just make `em look worse.
Dear #BlueMountain, lessons useful, rentals orderly, lift nerve wracking = fun! Splendid overall! However, your #survey ends w/ a loop error
There's good information to share with my #jour111 students in this lecture, but I must admit to picking a snoozer of a lecture.
Thanks lady! Still getting used to your new Twitter handle. Miss Panthergirl!
I swear after watching this 2 day event. I will never bully anyone in life. What a great lesson to learn as I watched her go down.
SO WATS DA MOVE FOR TONIGHT???
S/0 to my new follow
Listening to on Blog Talk Radio.
When is your birthday? We'll send you a free sample ;)
STOP THE BLEEDING, NUGGETS
Thanks for the recommendation!
. CEO Todd Marks delivers honest, humble & humorous remarks after being recognized as 2012 CRTV
Mass Effect 3 LE version unboxing being filmed now. Posting soon (check IGN's front).
is joining deca again? And yhu have to start wearing it more often, so i'll notice yhu.
And once again i hav managed to stay up all nite. Not to mention being ditched by so now im texting... DylanMyBro!:P
Have a good one Pumi man!
view a great web designer and land and business renovator !!
I followed everyone back So stop complaining.
Come pick him up again so I can see you w/o getting in trouble
sweet sweet freedom
Don't forget about Raw tonight with the ! Racing and Wrasling
Once fear, procrastination- held me back- well I�ve now put them to one side
I bet all the folks in this video was full of the loud, bars, and powder..
Possibly just "desperate."
Close Encounters of the #GreatBoobs - by Steven Spielboobs
Put your hands in the sky right now now now now now :)
If they can develop convenient amnesia regarding 2000-2008, they can forget ANYTHING.
It's really funny!
I expect to see a lot of Cinco De Mustaches at tomorrow's tailgate. That is all.
what part do u live in?
ahaha yeaa lets goo if u get sleepy ill take ur spot !! Haha WE GOING MIKEY HUNTING !!!!!
i'll let bethany do that!
Kiss your life. Accept it, just as it is. Today. Now. So that those moments of happiness you're waiting for don't pass you by.
My 1st long-form article of 2012 about will be on MyFoxHouston tomorrow. I hope you guys enjoy it as much as I had writing it.
Guess I have no new text buddies :(
beauty, brains, #beastmode, sillyness....you're the complete package!
Wow. That was one intense episode of Glee!
Great bumping into and sharing conversation last night. And thanks for the milk shake!
What A Joke. You Don't Even Have A Working Phone Number.
what are the options to pick up the tickets from you? Also, in advance, Thank you!!!
lol. Didn't know it still exsited. Never hear about anymore.
thanks for the clarification Drew haha
Fantastic speech today at Legal Tech by Don Tapscott... the new generation, innovation and how they affect EVERY business model!
LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK LUCK!
New markdowns in Men's & Shoes Women's and Kids apparel, Accessories and more oh my. So much for so little!
No Miss St!!! Tough break
Headed to SING "LIVE ON THE ROOF" with my boy Pastor Corey Brooks! Tune in now www.projecthood.org
Damn. Devils just tied it up.
hey!!! Plz respond or follow
Today is one of those days that I wish I was back in Paris in the rain. I can't wait to go back to Europe.
#I would give anythin to get u by my side.:))
#S/O TO ALL OF MY FOLLOWERS! I LOVE YA'LL! =D
I wish I hadn't it wouldn't be so heart breaking. The only thing making it okay is atleast we have the
sorry I missed this @ mention about the skull exhibit. I don't check twitter often...still figuring out how to use it.
ppl that don't know the rules at a 4 way stop let alone the rules of the road peroid!!
yay!! Boston was one of the pictures! :)
omg ur going to arianas show too?! i cant wait! <3
I know right, before his excuse was that he had a job but now that he doesn't whats his excuse..??
Also don't live next to them. Yankees games end way past my bedtime, apparently.
#TipTuesdays Take advantage of your customers by creating some special deals just for them or announce new products before the market knows
Libraries can employ MPLP by cataloging similar items as small collections instead of cataloging each item separately.
Hey man, your contribution to the Rock n' Roll HOF induction for the Beasties was awesome and touching. Well done my friend.
Wrote 4 pgs during the #writing sprint. How'd you do? Time for lunch & to start reading THE STARTER SCREENPLAY.
Shoppin till im droppin. Which will be like...fast.
Boo! (Notice I am booing your bad pun with another bad pun... Cemeteries? Boo? Oh, never mind...)
Slowly losing my 'thumos'
The whole situation pisses me off.
I feel sorry 4 those who have to go thru that hurricane
I am rooting for the #OrlandoMagic; after what #DwightHoward did to his coach, I want Van Gundy to show him he is not what he thinks he is.
RT : New #SavageU tonight on at 11 PM. I'll be tweeting along—join me!
I think there's a support group for people like us. ;-)
Hockey time. Lets go FLYERS
Doing Bar 1 tonight in the valley w/ my suffering wife, yay! Can't believe I'm leaving the house. Oh, my old bones are a'-whining ;p
I think it's a pride issue. I've decided to get over my pride and look for the great ideas from others.
Am I a little bit jealous of and her DiSC colleagues? Why yes. Yes I am.
It's definitely been surreal scoping the news about yesterday's events in NYC- I look understandably furious in some of the footage.
Fire alarm issue in Swiss Re corporate headquarters is keeping me stuck on the bus and from going to work. #monday -__-
OH Wow. so u have been pretty much working day and night as of late it sounds
So awesome all around! Let me connect you to who puts all this business magic together!
BAHAHAH well u can be a sport by sport follower...I allow that here with
Don�t play hard to get, instead play hard to forget
I got the looks & body, just need to practice my drumming skills! That what you mean? Drumming doesn't come as natural!
My debit card got rejected at mcdonalds still waiting on to set up my direct deposit
I love La Boulange -- but I agree, they need wifi! They probably don't to keep people from camping out...
drop me a line will hook up
We are in common agreement, as a society, that using your baby's stroller to stop subway doors from closing is frowned upon.
So ready to go ##
Posters in the James Gallery look amazing! Can't wait to hear from you & tonight!
Sorry I couldnt wish you #CONGRATS earlier but CONGRATS ON 15 MILLION FOLLOWERS! PUMPED FOR TONIGHT! YOU??
your welcome <3
New England Ancestors through Upstate New York out to upper Mid-west. www.unyg.com
Artemisia is prepping to begin our research study in about a week. We might be calling you...
The Make it in America music video is cute! And mosquitoes are biting me! >.>
Chef Special: Blackened Scallops with tomato, basil, and mozzarella salad.$21.95
My family & I stayed @ a rental home in your beach community & we LOVED IT! My daughter loved it too! Her name is Olivia! :-)
You can't change how you feel about someone it just come natually
in #Denver with my girl visiting
Wow fb now suggests pokes?! Thats crazy!!! I want to publicly suggest you not poke me! So silly! Why?!!! Ugh!
I'm very proud of you and have been inspired by your Lenten sacrifice...
If anyone downloading the torrent has any issues let me know. I'm going to get the stream set up for the rest of our viewers.
And try catch the game on Thurs. You turd ticklers. “: Sharks fans thanks for all your support this yr!
Hillis of 2011? Absolutely a bad comparison. Hillis of 2010? A much different story
yeah, a hot baby hahaha he was in the weight room after school and i couldnt stop staring lol
wait how long was he on for?
we out here!
#amazing how somebody's life can become a story.
Hundreds attended AMC's annual meeting this weekend. AMC Chapters, Adventure Travel, Conservation and other meetings at UMass Boston.
Preparing for this weekend's Juneteenth event at the MoAD in San Francisco. Genealogy classes for all. More info, www.moad-sf.org.
Porches and outdoor walkways at Groves allow ample room to enjoy the outdoors in a safe and secure environment.
RT : Today I learned Nick Nolte and Gary Busey are different people.
HOW MANY LEADS YOU GONNA BLOW IN THIS GAME SHITTSBURGH?!
I have the same reaction on "Lost" It'll pop into my head, I'll blurt out "hey do you know what happened at the end of Lost?"
This clippers grizz game is a great one
11 days until my birthday 💟
#Colts trying to imagine the franchise after Peyton! It's hard
I thank God I grew up in the Midwest because out here in the DMV (DC, MD, VA) most families don't seem to do "family time"
just follow your fucken dreams. let 'em talk cause they can't follow theirs so they try making your dreams nightmares.
A huge thank you goes out to the beautiful and & the stunning for being amazing actors/actresses
Have you checked out the brand new 3Bet.us website yet? Massive 33% off XMas sale going on now!
It was lovely, although I cheated—parked at the Info Center lot and biked from there, as my bike is *not* street legal.
Got staples on my d**k (why) f*ckin’ centerfolds
I checked u out and I think we could do something....when u get some time send me a track to jump on I will DM u my email! :)
Vinny, You're legit amazing. You think you could follow me? I would very much appriciate it<3
is really good at "draw something" 
I just seen her his morning and she looked fine. :/ awh.
Thank you. I am also following you.
i have a bag that says (music = life)
Ba ba ba ba what to do ah ha kill my bros! (just kidding!!)
did the cops really come to the house last night?
Hello Jersey
I'd never heard of Estelle. Thanks for the tip, just bought her CD. RT : Estelle is fabulous! Truly liked her--and her music.
well I'd be glad to tell them they made a huge mistake letting you go lol
You're welcome! Thanks for featuring the #MilwuakeeMuseumMile!
Indiana has a big advantage with Roy Hibbert against Miami but who wins the matchup when the Heat go small?
Mountanins can't be climbed without taking the first step.
Back to my favorite new study spot. Only thing keeping me going is this Starbucks iced green tea
I know they look at you so angry when you don't get the ball :o
Busy day tomorrow!!!!!!
American forces moving from Montreal toward Quebec have captured three armed British vessels
Stay tuned to www.genxvapor.com for E-liquid announcements, gourmet US made liquids in flavors that have your tastebuds addicted!
Syracuse coach Jim Boeheim has never beaten a Big Ten team in the NCAA tourney, and it'll hopefully stay that way.
sure i do lets start by hi my name is jasmin lol
Ikr u play lax?
I know. Never a good thing :(
What is your favorite number?
That is the best "trick" 2 getting started. Tell yourself u only have 2 do a bit, and once going it is easier. Yay, ur done!
“ I have one of you and your ex together looking al al cute! Can't wait to up load it either ;)
i love your cover from One less lonely girl. So beautiful! i like ya ♥♥ please folow me? :$ ♥♥
Just got back from our first day in the studio and everything's sounding sweet. So excited for everyone to hear!
Good much today your gonna do great! And remember! Your a beast!! ;)
For real, the IN M0tion team is taking over this summer. If there's a venue you know is the absolute place to be, let me know.
My vision was just time slots at two booths w/laptops. Others?
Hey! We missed the PLN portion this am. Had to hold forth for the whole 45 mins.
damn huge day then
Eff you for this text: "Seeing the Black Keys, Avett Brothers, and Trampled by Turtles all in the next month."
justin bieber is calling girls now! .. one every night ! check www.call-justinbieber.com RT !~
hah, me too. she's definitely 'meh'
Why is everything at the apple store so damn expensive?
RT : my,"When UR right about an issue, how necessary is it to make the other person wrong?"
Nice going - looks like no one did the due diligence on the (un)availability of
took care of a few patients over the weekend. In between soccer games! They didn't mind a doctor who works out!
I was too busy being all thought-provoked to tweet. :)
oh well
You took 4 yrs Spanish, are you able to speak it fluently? I mean could you hold a conversation with someone who speaks it? curious
Prove it then muthafucka!!!
maybe...for the royals, just not sure on most teams.
lol ok guess we got different teams and moves for that night
Always Kind Always Smilin :)
I'll Advise You to SHUT THE FUCK UP!
I need a quick topic for a tech video today. Let me know!
Dat Mary Jane In My System To Keep My Mind Settled
Yes it is!!!! RT : life is good
When is it? And where?
No! I don't want one either! F Tablets!
yes. I love snow.
enjoying reconnecting with a bundle of friends on facebook.
NEXT. WEEK
You better do austream today or else i'm gonna cry.
RT : SF Animal Shelter setting up to handle Los Alamos/White Rock pets if major evac. No farm animals. More at noon
RT : The National Archives holds 1.28 mil #CivilWar pension files--our volunteers have processed 100,000. Watch:...
today is the day my SISTER/BESTFRIEND is coming to visit me in DC I'm super excited have safe travels mama!!!!!
I herd we will not release the new design new years eve, but soon this week, we can't wait! ~ Tim Warner, DeVante's Social Media Marketer
announced that 21 players had a 3.0 GPA or better for Winter Quarter during today's team meeting.
Mark your calendars for the FREE seminar this Saturday at 12 pm at TeamVic 24 Hour Fitness! Call Rosalyn with any questions 301-613-4689!!!
#Teamsthatcanbeatthelakers Flint Tropics
For me to fight two bitches, he'll yeah lol
“: Did you know that #marijuana is the most studied plant on the earth?”
seriously...damn you Chicago for getting all kinds of cool shit :)
Love your show every week!
have ya ever thought about how safe your family is with all the toxins in your home?
I have THE BEST roommate ever! Gave me a fluffy mattress pad, gonna be the best sleep I've had in 19 years!
FUCK HIS MUSIC.
My cats still don't understand the concept of daylight savings in regards to feeding time. Being a night person, I don't get it either.
turns out i have jury duty in a few days... in minneapolis. pretty excited for a 6-hour drive each way to go to court
Ugh. Caltrain is packed this morning.
Facts.RT I know we all realize this already, but just to restate it, GOTYE = AWESOME. If you don't know it google it immediately.
I am at Electric Fetus. Should I tell them?
"if two people love eachother, they should just be together. " . . . Its really not that simple.
You can see how much SYTYCD really cares about the dancers. Also is as stunningly beautiful in person as on TV.
Industrial. Every time.
He's an amazing kid. Super happy and outgoing. It was fun to interview him.
I just finished a 4.00 mi run with a time of 42:14 with Nike+ GPS.
" Hope niggas don't bullshit with the suite ! "
happy new year modasucka. The mutombo is out in full effect tonight modasucka!!
Anywhere with a nice view
It took losing you to find me. It would have took finding me to keep me from losing you. Why is life so unfair?
Now that I've watched the pink slime video, I can never drink a strawberry milkshake from McDonald's again.
hello cousin!how are you dude?
any ticket from the week will be good for tomorrow if play does not finish tonight
hahah ok, thanks :)
Good luck!!! just picked up our official 48 Hour EggTimer for our session!!
Presenters comparing themselves to Bert and Ernie :-)
i like the way i spelled his name :/
Great new way of gifting monies to someone to help with thier closing costs when purchasing a home. Contact me for details.
#conconf Very cool application is Layar, designed in the Netherlands. It's at layar.com or watch-it on YouTube.
Some ppl need to forget about the ppl who had hurt thm & move on with life
a bear does sh*t in the woods it will sh*t in yur roses or anywhere else it wants. Asfar as dingle berries go They don't care
Ms. J, can we tentatively say "yes" to your video taping session Fri, March 9?
Wait... Potential love interest?! Hmm things may be looking up.
oh oh oh...I almost forgot. A champagne bar too, champagne with all the options.
My California dream is bringing and I on stage.
It's 's sweet 16 today! Please wish her a happy birthday!115
Ate way too much at Father's Day BBQ.
Thanks for info. LMAO. Haven't even been to NY in yrs! Guess they're trying to "infiltrate" from inside? Not hard w/ open movement.
Getting back to it! Lots of family, lots of fun! Ready for some normalcy again!
#LTBroadcasts "The project now is to revive that old Nicaragua idea and build a water route from the Atlantic to the pacific" (3/4/31)
man hold up
lol! It happens every time
LOL. Because we both have experiences that are unique to us. Its quite an apt comparison if we are talking about experience
Had MLS conference call today. Pleasantly surprised to have on the call too. Oh how far we've come!
I suggest you all treat NATO like a Zombie outbreak.
In past, always had some semblance of an idea about what to expect from #Bucks offseason & next season. Now: None whatsoever.
9-0 Locos. Don't count us out yet! Still another half of football left.
um.. in is arms :p
Thanks for the link - Crazy stuff!
Hyperexstended my arm at practice... again.
C'mon #Giants!!
Goodmorning #littlemonsters . I hope you all are having a great memorial day weekend. Paws up!
you'll have to tell me how your weekend tweeting goes!
RT : Sports do not matter at all. They are merely a distraction from life & when life & death intersect with sports it's jarring
I had to retweet both of those cuz it was just too awesome! hope you slept well! :) Have a great day!
not at all. I be hitting u up.
I saw a sign with an arrow that read "Free Karate".
Meeting w Ramsey County Sheriffs command today - a great agency, driven to provide excellent service, fairly and cost-effectively.I mean it.
I'm very excited about the start of the new newspaper, Look for the first issue on campus tomorrow!
(LIVE) "How do we find ways to express personal vulnerability?" great Q. Isn't it abt taking risks? cultural barriers?
and to Washington DC for a concert and meet-n-greet! (: #AustinToDC 26
Finally getting to wear shorts today to school :D
I hate tables!!!
My birthday too! RT: mind-blowing: Danny Hultzen and Jesus Montero the M's battery of the future were each born on Nov. 28, 1989
thinks my niece Julie sang like an angel. She likes to go against type. The other kids sang well, too
Tonight! Grimoon from Italy with locals Unique Massive! At The Bunkhouse 21+ 10pm $5
Pretty sure I get to see TWO times next month!!
#CanIBeHonestWithYou <---- b/c you sure haven't been #honest to me ...
I think Flyers are waiting for them suspensions to be cleared&the BROAD STREET BULLIES play round 2 in game 5
That always solves things :)
We gone be on t.v tomorrow poppin we about to have fun
5 #auditions in a week.....ok LETS DO ThiS!!!!
Thanks for sharing it, Elan! ^ac
We have a few used die cutters, blankers, and foil stampers available. Email me if you're in the market .
assuming you mean D&P... & yup! but we r d&pdc. Met a few of them, know some of PWs they've produced. u a PW? director? in the biz?
Oh my god this picture I just found. LMFAOOO CRIES
What other sport do you get to watch the "F'in A-holes" play "Balls to the Face"?! .. Wait, don't answer that.
Chi. NetMarketing panel insights were interesting to learn. Great to hear marketers' high regard of agency partners.
It's funny when old people swear.
Just paid 8 electric bills & 5 Gas bills fro some heimishe yiden that cant afford it. If u know anyone that needsr help, contact us-Retweet
Wasn't a Foster believer till I opened my eyes and really started watching his game. The Pacers will miss u sir, congrats on a solid career!
Any Information Architects looking for a job? Ping me.
#coys! as would say, tottenham till i die
Its time to check the candy from last night
omg I made your name....honored
Good Night Tweople....
Try as you will, you cannot annihilate that eternal relic of the human heart, love. ~ Victor Hugo
Finally putting together our April Must-See Painting shows post together. Should be in time for the weekend...
No squares in my circle
Time for TA
We bought our tickets, how about you? RT : Retweet if you've gotten your #BrewCityStompDown tickets.
I get so nauseous at night.. -_-
When you need to plan a PARTY, be sure to give us a call! We'll make it unforgettable!!! 405-670-3600
like hell freezing over? Lol
Something needs to be said for not only the fact that the pens are down 0-2 on home ice, but they blew leads both times.
really really funny, really really perfect, really really precise. Thank you.
#SomeFactsYouShouldKnow i absolutely LOVE hugs..and being tickled..but shhh that's a secret.
Surrounded by about 10 firework shows. Happy 4th!
yeah absolutely! I'll be at ; but introduce yourself on the meetup page and the guys will hack with you!
Rooting for hon. You are my fave, and have my vote any day. Keep your beautiful spirit shinning. Love u and am proud of u.
Diamonds on my neck, call it the ghetto's guillotine.
Chicago Bands!! Open slots on May 26th!
Christofer Drew is coming to vegas today <3 I wish I could see him again
Depends on the course. Some, like River Place, have well maintained greens, good fairways. Others are rough in the winter.
relaxing, and tonight going to champs in Brookfield, meeting up with some friends. And you?
did you drop the android version yet? Can't find it. #killingmesmalls :)
Its a warm 14 degrees in in denver co
I didn't wanna go to school but fuggit, it's early day anyways.
I mean I even mentioned #bdayshots it's cool though...just forget al about me, huh?
Be nobody but urself in dis world, which is doing ur best night and day...
what movie??
Those Occupy LA folks are pretty amazing.
is this resume ok? can you give me some feedback?
That can't be too many hours. You stay put.
Solid! 's honey badger piece was picked up by yesterday, tremendous win for your team. Nice get.
Save this tweet; it is very handy. Works for all values of "it." RT I am not tweeting anything about it.
3 months exactly. Time flies but seems to stand still.
Big THANKs to the folks for the Pad & Quill iPad case. It'll definitely help keep the iPad safe in the saddle bags. Cheers
Oh that's just rude! Sick day? Lol JK. Toni Morrison isn't paying your bills.
Dr. Laura said 10 years apart is to big, you'd have nothing in common, I totally disagree. I like this formula much better.
Happy #NFLDraft day! Good luck 2 all the #Longhorns in this year's draft
Tryna go to sleep but this #lightning won't stop! Keeping me awake.
Ordering a shirt off the Stand GRAND website and never washing it because Vinny touched it with his own hands.
How about a remote that always works.
Thanks for including us in your Real Estate Connection Daily!
lovely snow, see you in just a few hours
count sheep!
has a show coming up at the Hi-Tone Cafe in #Memphis So excited to have that weekend with :) Gonna jam & cry.
Don't be such a 2 hr course reserve.
Silence is a girl's loudest ry , you know she's really hurting when she starts ignoring you . <3
Watched "Elf" for the first time in years and was shocked to see a younger, blonder . So
Okay, I admit it. Cabin in the Woods was pretty darned good.
I'm a dude! Or, that's what Lindzi called me on her ranch RT If you're a dude and you love #TheBachelor retweet! Ain't no shame
that's what they say lol
philadelphia is like the kinder garden version of miami
what were the videos you had a couple months ago? Like 1000$?
Overbooked my flight so I took the two free round trip tickets to anywhere they were offering.
M.O.G. from Warriors.For.Christ & ANGEL of D.O.C. "Disciples of Christ" NOT ONLY LED SOMEONE TO CHRIST BUT HELPED SOMEONE GIVE THERE...
Awh turns 18 tomorrow. they grow up so fast :(((((((
Nori Aoki is now 11 of his last 17 ABs. That's A-OK in my book.
them lil niggas go hard in the paint in southwest
I was buying gas at a BP in Madison, WI. I was the only one pumping and the clerk lowered the price while I was pumping.
I ALMOST DIED
Thank you so much! Hope you had a great day!
Watching videos of heavy D
Happy Birthday one of my best friends, doing her thing in grad school & I'm so proud of her! Enjoy your day boo!
that's jizz to my ears.
both, happy eastern motors!
ah! tell Dublin I said "hello!" I miss the place somethin' rotton, even that little bodhran bollix under the Molly Malone satue
Fantastic time with and in Modesto!! Thank you,
it likes AAPL just lowered 3rd qtr guidance. Not sure why the stock is up after hours...
tomorrow needs to not be monday..
#KidsOnRace should be mandatory viewing for all parents of school-aged children. Eye opening & educational.
Lol! Oh yeah, That would be awesome! :D (Lol I wasn't thinking of anything..I was confused for a second there.) Sorry about..
Not wrong at all. Just make sure there are no witnesses or video cameras. Lol Sometimes you need to set an example!
you should schedule a spreecast a couple days out and get people to RSVP. i bet you would have your biggest spreecast yet!
web tweeps: what's the best hours web page you've seen? i.e. store hours, restaurant hours, library hours. does anyone do this well?
Its sunny over here my friend :)
You are very welcome. So glad you love it!
More uniqueness? you can go to IKEA in Brooklyn on a ferry from Manhattan to Brooklyn FREE! see details next tweet
Summerhouse Five.
its fun and its on the beach! If u have car its only 1 hr to the ferry
Son won't let me come with him to his senior pictures. "What's the point," he says. "All you would do is sit in the corner and cry."
(Unlike me) his hands were fine, and he worked, but these things bothered him a long time. Nobody's alive to tell the details.
What about the "tiny" neighborhood that's supposedly tucked away somewhere La Jolla?
lololololol I know!
#Whyhavea phone if u don't pick up or text back.
Bad hair days👎
Been working hard on this unsigned senior showcase at BRCC on March 24th!! I hope it goes well! Need all unsigned senior in BR there!!
thanks for the nice picture :)
It should be amazing!
#GrandMa told me a #story about folks #passing once, Faruq. She wouldn't do it. No, sir.
SOMEDAY I WONNA SEE U JUSTIN AND BE FRIENDS
Yo man, Koontown's gonna be headed your way in August for Onyxcon. Just thought you should know.
Hi Romeo this is one of your biggest fans. Hope you had a good Christmas. I hope to really meet you soon. Always believe in you
Heading to Frys to buy food for the hungry Drobo.
Wrote a KIIILLLER song with Leslie Ellis today... we'll finish it soon; can't wait to get this one out there.
Happy Birthday #CharlesDickens!
Love is when you meet someone who tells you something new about yourself.
I wanna burn one with #oomf tomorrow
Missing the flyers pens game cuz of work tonight
Live jazz brunch starts at 10:30! We'll get the mimosas ready for you!
I just saw a dirigible advertising vodka here in Oakland. Be responsible. Don't drink and fly airships.
Why is Coco Bob's closing?
Let's go Pacers put dese bitches out
Egg bagel with sausage inside. Amazing breakfast!!!!
I'm pondering joining a gang what's more sliming red or blue
Thanks again for posting another one of our job listings!
Tryna hit my 200th tweet so i guess me,twitter for tonight!!!!;)
When your referred too as "friend" or "brother"... oh yeah...
#MomentWhen You Feel like Karma is Taking forever and you do her work =P
that's right
It's currently dumping snow here in Milwaukee.
Nite! I hope I sleep way better than I did last night!
I should share a photo from new years...kid looks like he's a natural
Thanks for the MT! Hope you guys are faring well during the mass student exodus.
Thanks for coming out and supporting tonight. Appreciate it!
Heading to makino chaya. On a mission to get
but that's the same sugar that's in an apple or any other fruit or vegetable basically.
Webster copied that "prepared statement" almost word for word from statement on Friday---check out his timeline
RT : Happy hour continues until 7pm as does the meet up/tweet up. Come join. Tweeting not even necessary.
hahahaha I just saw this now. What's up?
hey Phil!!!!! I like your face, will you marry me?
Playing Jenga while listening to the TRON: Legacy soundtrack = EPIC.
“There is no arrow straight path..., so it does no good to worry about if you’re doing it the right way – look for all oppotunities"-SGudasz
Thanks to all our recent new followers.
thanks for the #FF!
Shout out to my new followerss !! copy the link
everyday is a new opportunity to be your best self
latest single , listen at www.reverbnation.com/roberttorme
For example, a compliment: Numbers 2, 3, and 4 are always , , and I hope it's true.
I hope this pain goes away so I can actually enjoy myself tonight.
Good to be here! Thanks!
did you check on my video? Go to Facebook.com/ciroc74 and add me and there's a video on there.
CONGRATS!! News 4 Emmy nominated for Nat'l Championship Air Races crash; Only station in Reno getting Emmy nom for 2011 news coverage
your tweet helped RT : I love when #AmericanU graduation becomes a trending topic in #DC each year. Congrats to the #2012AUGrad s
no test... still can't wait though!
haha what a good kid.
One of the many reasons to love VT! RT : 44 years ago today Vermont banned billboards. What a great law!
You're quite welcome! Thank you for stopping by yesterday.
is tweeting quite a lot today (;
Hoping today is better than the other days!
We don't have to go all the way, we'll just lie here and hold each other.
Leg Council ballot is out for new study committees.Rep Vos to chair steering committee to devlop symposia series on state income tax reform.
That nap I just took >>>>
after spending most of the day not grading, i've moved out to the back yard to grade. it couldn't be more perfect outside.
Good Morning To My Big Brother
Why, I am the spitting image of a young Al Yankovic.
My mother is completely obsessed with Garth Brooks. I'm having serious concerns. I'm counting, she's watched the live DVD 13 days in a row..
: search their songs on youtube. & yeah i did.
Don't get me wrong. Love Pink Floyd. Not my favorite song, but I'm fine with it. Just such a weird idea.
Brand new video out in 1 hour!
Find rare collectibles to mainstream fiction from 40 dealers at LVA Antiquarian Book Sale on April 28. Free admission.
the lady at lulas askd why I'm trying on a prom dress bc I look extremely young and innocent..and looks like she's 18..
surely not before you come home...
I feel better just knowing he is not going to pass any bill that increases our deficits....Right
where do i go to see it...
Another night of making lists for my lists. When will the sanity pills kick in?
3 words: Mom is home!
HAVE A BLESSED DAY!
Great idea William! :)
The ladies from are so fashionable! We love their interview!! ://ow.ly/aHD99
For it isn't enough to talk about peace. One must believe in it. It isn't enough to believe in it. One must work for it. ~ Eleanor Roosevelt
Happy 4th! Laugh, play, enjoy our freedom and Be careful!
Now,I With My Bestfriend,Study Together. Yeaah,It's Very Fun.
I can't wait to meet and have you all together in Tokyo!
YES! If we had British tv here, I'd do the same, but I don't so I can't do anything about it.
TONIGHT! stop by and hang 9PM. Viet-Ruse/The Colt of Us/Kevin Sanchez. Backbeat Magazine's Live & Local Sunday Showcase. FREE!
Kobe. I can't even. Just. Wow
You would totally kick ass on Where in the World is Carmen San Diego!
My email box shows a RSS feed w/2 titles: Blog your book and Don't blog your book. Will we ever be on the same page?
Watchn whitney houstons funeral on tv
Mommy!! Where are you at with those vocal lessons!?
My pleasure!
Looking for a Lead singer...???
I bring it back to what I have said for the past 10 years: there is ZERO accountability in the Baltimore City Public School System.
omg u finally got on twitter!
“: In a relationship : Everyone likes you. Single : No one likes you. Does this happen to anyone else?”
tiesto @ borgata sounds like a good idea
maybe not a fight as much as cutting off the poor old lady's oxygen lol
#Brewers off-days can suck it.
Well I thought I did anyway
Hope it stop
Darn skippy RT #Taurus - Everyone loves your confidence and charisma. Don't hesitate to go for what you want.
I'm eternally proud of my wife for being a teacher and truly caring for her kids.
So, today is National High Five Day! High five us if you LOVE #Plano! ✋
You need an app for that :-)
I hope you have a great shoot!
I keep getting these messages but I don't think you took any pictures of me.
Creativity Tip: Two minds really create such wonderful new ideas that one person could never have thought of.
Started the day with a little MJ... and things have just been going my way all day...
WHY WE NEED you on the radio!!!! I get no scoop on anything anymore:) Depression setting in...
how do I get a job with your entertainment company? I have the resume to back up my work ethic!
Im slim shady yes im the real slim shady all you other slim shady's are just imitating wont the real slim shady please stand up
Wet? RT : I guess it's going to rain. Perfect, the weather matches how I feel.
oh good. 20 minutes I can handle. A few hours just seems weird. thanks.
Just got a Gus Johnson fix!
lol my mom thought Mr.April was a student
Im absolutely obsessed with you story!!! Not even kidding I'm do anxious for more! Lol I used to be a Hassie shipper cause 1/2
I followed you. Would you mind following this account>> ?
Shitty. Delete this immediately.
"We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, therefore, is not an act but a habit." - Aristole
When is happy hour at the S. Philly Cantina?
girl yes
Marquette better get their shit together
i love your tweets keep them coming.
Do NOT forget a Thank You card/email after the interview, this could make or break you getting moved forward to next step.
FYI - There are 238 days remaining in the year.
Let's go Bears D UP!!!!
I better be getting an Xbox achievement once May 15th arrives lmao
How do you stay up to date on CRM news, ? Have a favorite industry magazine or resource?
Thanks for this It reminded me to follow #redrocks for concert info.
Hi Jenni, sorry for delay. No, I've never worked with plays or scripts at all, outside my realm of experience.
I'm running two machines for the first time in a while. Is Synergy still the best option for using input devices across multiple machines?
Question for about being a confident public speaker. YES! "
but I broke that at the end of the day ;)
Have you had the sesame sticks they sell at TJ's? They're addictive like crack.
Try lee real quick.. He did lead you into this game
#BnBWed the deed is done. Now for Riff Raffs at 6
1 good thing about working out east rather than the Midwest is that ppl have credit cards rather then prepaid card
Right on! However, it's sure gonna be hard to leave... but I miss my kiddos and my wonderful husband!
Following the tweets from NOLA, I am upset about the decision I made to stay home. F money an decisions that need to be made being an adult
thanx for the follow
accidently pulled the hem out of one of her favorite skirts. faculty meeting. then hair appt.
I can't wait to see what you do. I loved the photos of her nursery!
If you're absent during my struggle, don't expect to be present during my success.
I agree: another reason he is better for CBB than the likes of Bo Ryan or the spawn of Pitino
my sister babyshower was yesterday, she got lots and lots of stuff.....
Well connected, fuck wit niggas well respected
Tweet me back at the end of June. LeBron is great...but Durant is better
PC running slow? Start off by getting our 15 point check diagnostics Today!
we like to discuss partnership in the EDU coalition with other major EDU tools. Who can we mail about it?
I really don't want to wake up.. Ever
sorry I missed u today. Will be there 2 morrow. Email & I'll send my
Yay! Got some worked lined up!
Thanks! I do love the Robert Harris book for older kids.
So I'm otw back to the bend wassup for tonight what is everybody on
“: Have #Canucks fans taken the top spot over #MapleLeafs and #Packer fans as the most annoying in the biz?” win something MN
LOL his love like woe style? because I think he's sound great either way. His OLD OLD style is great with his untrained voice
I'm signing off - thanks for all your wonderful questions - would love to do another #ESHealthChat again soon! Happy Good Friday! - Becky
RT : Have a great sunny weekend
am I the only one who thinks its absolutely bizarre when people make Facebooks for their pets???
drop it like its hot
tired as hell.
I pointed out what appeared to be either an over sight in the design of the site or fraud and was booted from the site.
Good day for sloppy - when you eat - National Chile Dog Day - yum yum. Oh, and wash it down with some leche - Nat'l Chocolate Mile Day too
It's #May! YAY! One month closer to Texas Spa and Salon Month.
I love thunderstorms.
should follow me because of how big of a fan i am. nuff said. (: 9
Did you make it in on Sunday??
Today was incredible. I'm so fulfilled in being in God's will.. #Flaws&all
sure why not
Life couldn't be better
Our greatest glory is not in never falling, but in rising every time we fall.
We're excited too! So much Froyo to make!
would love to chat! Email me
#FauxNews not FoNews I feel that I can trust Ms. She & had the courage to start the conversation about IBC.
thanks man. Go Cowboys and Mavs!
as a born and raised California girl, come dead of winter u won't miss Michigan! Best of luck to you both!!
I don't how to feel about this it's mind bottling.
That's it the whole Blue team should be sent off the Biggest Loser.
Bob McDonnell to campaign with Mitt Romney in Virginia this week: Another VP tryout?
happy birthday!
JUST BOUGHT A CRAZY ASS BLUETOOTH ONLINE IT SHULD BE HERE IN FOUR DAYZ MY NIGG!....IMA BE GOOD FUCKIN MONEY!
Shout out to the peeps....from last status I just did....I'm still trippin off the reaction
wanna try malibu red.
Good morning! Hope Youu Havee A Nicee Day! :D Love You<3
Don't #GetAnXbox unless you want to pay for a bunch of shit. Trust me. Make sure you have a yearly income of at least $69,000
Excited for the show tonight!
Open Auditions on May 28 at COCA. More info to follow.
Not to go all math on you two, but the 11.7 is slightly more of the team's available minutes than the 14.0.
Summer produce is at an end. Heavier dishes r on the menu and you should be seeing more offal. God I love Fall. Can't wait for parsnips.
I hate when he falls asleep while im textin him D:
Forgot how much I LOVE new start ups!!
Excited to jump into today. Watch out #devs, a lot of questions coming your way!
Nice to meet you Vienna!
I accepted a position at in Calif. Change is tough, & I'll miss NASA HQ, but I'm excited to be part of the Ames team!
Only 65 days until 2012 Convention in Boston! Are you registered yet? Early bird rates until January 19.
-___- why my twitter not letting me follow back my followers? -_- huh???
back off.. I'll get it back geez 😳
theater arts students are honored
well we did see some guy holding his bumper on w/bailing wire the other day...
Anyone have a 9V? Battery died during last live shot.
Get chip to diverge juke slide n Dj solo to do the chicken Wang
So GOP's answer is deregulate everything and drill--Deep Water Horizon 2 here we come. That Is So Wrong! RT : Drill baby drill.
ugh, my new replacement iPhone means i have to try to remember all my passwords for access to my social media apps
I agree with you on the modern family thing...not funny
NP I follow you. Follow me back?
Lonely.n....rs i cant deal at all
"God knows what you've been doing, everything you've been doing. You may fool me, but you can't fool God!" - The Great Gatsby,
Thanks for the follow ! Don't forget about the Alumni Orientation with on Wednesday at 7:00 pm in MGC 200.
Hope everybody had a MERRY CHRISTMAS & for all our jewish fans, a HAPPY HANUKKAH!!!
Chinese for dinner SOON!!!
Nothing is really work unless you would rather be doing something else." --James M. Barrie
#askObama Ans 12: Tax code changes: eliminate jet loop holes, oil drilling subs, tax rates back to Clinton rates for millionaires
Do you ?
Its Saturday.....time to eat!!! Come check us out we are giving away a free dessert with every dinner red velvet, oreo, german choc, oowweee
Interesting to see #semantic #network of #Islamic #jihad web sites reacting to #Obama speech in Egypt in June.
": 61' Second yellow issued to Paladini for the soft red." Oh Chicago gets a red in the reserve match.
Did the neighbor kids open a lemonade stand? That's among the
If you check the Annenberg YouTube page in about a week, a video of the talk will be posted there
Love it!
iwill do it !! today has moved my to tears of sadness and and hope !!! remember 911
Ugh My momma took my fone butd i aint worry about itd
I Wish I had someone to watch this movie wit me..
you better!
Rogers is talking about the open endedness of Lucille Clifton's poem
Hanging in the famous C-8 for #Stroupe auditions with and
needs a crash course in twitter... anyone want to teach me?
Seriously! You are a little slice of heaven for the eyes. :)
There's nothing like being woken up out of a drunken slumber by a floor buffing machine right outside your door.
Woohoo! RT Bald Faced Truth radio show broadcasts live today from Chiles Center 3-6 pm 95.5 FM, prior to Pilots-USF game
I'm sitting in front of you.
PSU situation reminds me of that old saying; "Absolute power corrupts absolutely." Especially as they play Ohio State today.
What is more valuable - viewing games that leagues create or creating and managing these games as a captain?
Now in DH little magazines panel.
It's funny how much things can change in a few days
Sometimes if you want to see a change for the better, you have to take things into your own hands
*cue the slow jamz* RT : Visiting the grandparents while I'm home...grandparents house is the hot spot
Happy Birthday to Isaac!
Tomorrow Caitlin will be at in the Yawkey Center from 10-2 with Alumna ... come visit us
What if we lived in a non-suppressed society? Politicians self-censor, women tame down so we don't threaten men... We have such potential!
applebees then transformers 3 with the boys!!
watch the ticks!
Everything in #lincolnpark is worth a tour...naturally ;)
This guy loves calling me a school girl.....what's up with that?!?!
I cnt breath
Visualize this thing you want. See it, feel it, believe in it. Make your mental blueprint and begin. Robert Collier
Oh yeah! Let's get it :D
come watch me on blog
best of luck!
where'd you get the sphynxs and were they affordable?
And so, my fellow Americans: ask not what your country can do for you - ask what you can do for your country.
The toilet paper at work keeps getting worse. So thin you can see through it. Where do they buy it? Never seen anything this cheap in stores
I understand
"Darkness cannot drive out darkness; only light can do that. Hate cannot drive out hate; only love can do that." ~ Martin Luther King, Jr.
I think he is being humbly confident, which he has to be. We should win them all but I care far more about Feb 5 than 16-0!
"Weird is a relative, not an absolute term." -- Baron Frank N. Furter
I Feel So Far Away Right Now
I am watch !! This weekend if its hot. I gotta wear it on a nice day.
#Nf follow back?
RT : #lovelansing: Great homes will be open this weekend from 1-5pm on Sat & Sun. Come see this home & 19 more like it:...
I want to do something fun tonight. Someone make it happen :)
Ditto RT : #ASTD2012 Still reeling from 's fascinating talk this morning.
no need to to be sorry.
time to get this blog party started grubes
I actually like the "Occupy Nationals Park" shirts the Phillies fans are rockin'. Pretty clever on their end, which I didn't expect.
<<<<<<<<< you gone Need king Kong if you step to me. You gone learn today now let's play
Oh Yeah!
I've done what I can 4 2nite. Wish it were more. You're so excellent at this!
There 's an app called Shitter that creates toilet paper rolls printed with a twitter feed
with a 'nife'
Tonight I'll be at "Ritual Fridays" at The Atrium Lounge with Come out and wear green for Saint Patricks Day weekend!!!
The problem of overlapping hierarchies is written all the way down the computational stack.
Kids are doing tongue twisters. Six sick sheeps. Ba!
i really want some boat shoes.
IMO, they do not. But I am old-fashioned. My daughter was reading ebooks in school in 1st grade (last year) and loved it.
Best party in Vegas tonight, baby! Tropicana- 3801 Las Vegas Boulevard
Success is a ladder that cannot be climbed with your hands in your pocket
Breakfast with the Hipsters again and more work on the StoryForge app. Looks nice on my Ipad 3.
i love reading your tweets(:
thanks for the add A
dare you not turn up at the weekend you Toons!
On my way down to hear talk about Obj-C at Nothing like learning from an original NeXT instructor...
is true
How do u get these lol
Whhhheeewwww!!! I'm finally home! Hope your week started off right! LOL ;) :)
Bilbo is so photogenic!
RT : 11:11 - Make A Wish is trending!!!(: that's so awesome!:D You guys are SO amazing! I love you<3
RT : #thatawkwardmoment when you realize you still haven't gotten your #BrewCityStompDown2012 ticket...
Today is going to be even nicer than yesterday. I see a nice walk in my immediate future.
9 to 5 / day in out / months years decades / working for the boss / life hanging by a thread / of the dread / of a pink slip. Arya-Holmes.
hope it gets the funding! congrats on your own recent successes too, looking forward to checking out
If you havent eaten at Ezele's chicken you don't know what greatness is
I think should follow me
“: Carl Beane, Fenway Park's public address announcer, was killed in a car accident today: Well that sucks. Loved that guys voice.
I'm gay and that's the way I will stay. ;)
It's close. It's real close.
No she teaches Lodging Management! :)
I'm so sleepy but I can't sleep. What to do...what to do....
Donna's pretty amazing with crochet needles. You have got to see her upcycled bags and repurposed homemade gifts.
im booked to stay in the nice resort, but cant check n til 2 tomorrow afternoon. But I would have to get up ...
Ik but I have known al the manoa ppl since
Haha yes, that sentence was cut off at an awkward point. Click the link to read the rest of the post!
Sweet, i'll see if i can drop by and hang some
how was the left over Chinese? I hear it's better than Ryan's!
Not in person. So no.
That was my first thought too.
So that old dude on the ship at the end of tonight - Olivia's prophesied killer from the animated episode?
Unusually satisfying Monday--making slow but steady project on book revision project
ever notice how broke people always wana dress up, but rich people always got on some chill shit
k I got you tomorrow!
That Frank Romano video makes my time on Twitter worthwhile. Too bad he didn't talk more about his Viewmaster, though.
no. I have a dinner tonight.
Can't take this heat no more
Who am I kidding I will be up all night everyday this week bc its my last full week of high school and I wont be doing shit!!! :D
Cleopatra owned one of the world's first vibrators
Exploring Latin American music with 1,000 metro school children at Lisner Auditorium. Great way to start the day!
unfortunately, your points address simply learning by video & don't show an understanding of flipped class at all.
MK: Dr. Kahn is going over the irrational fear of Islam and Muslims
Anyone have a recommendation for ballroom dance lessons in the DC/MD/NoVA area?
It gets weirder and weirder every day I swear... And YES THERE'S A CHEESECAKE FACTORY. In New York. 😉
Tonight I'm going to sleep with a smile even tho today was one of my worst days,,,
So I noticed haha but that's a good thing. It sure beats being in a bad mood, eh? ;)
Was he referring to the impact his presidency will have on the U.S.? ? ? ?
heath slater is so hot
Alert: Emotional mess in the Weather Center for the next hour! Reading/Judging the 50 Best Moms in SD essay contest right now.
Just augmented my cafe experience.
Everyone Follow trying to beat CNN to 1 million followers and is going to donate tons to charity.
Yikes, hope no one is hurt
cc: MT Just read about AOL launching an online video network... VERY interested to see the concept
Lawler returns as the Cardinals take over on the 24-yard line, down 28-7. Six left in the half.
The dog does not understand the time change. She's ready for dinner, even though she's two hours early. It's going to be a long two hours.
You are gorgeous! ♥ Ohh! & i love your Marilyn Monroe background:D
Emergence or epiphenomena may be the terms we were searching for to describe the whole being greater than the sum of the parts.
It's going to be a cold night in New York
awh thank you =) you have a nice day too
Ain't - no - lie. Baby, bye-bye-bye. RT " darrin's dance grooves"
I'm such a bone head!
they weren't allowed to before? i'm surprised a married couple would be on a deployment together. didn't know that happened
This Thursday, AMST and GIGH present “Why the US Moved to the Right in the 1970s: A Conversation with Rick Perlstein” @ 2pm in ICC 662
“: Kanye West actually seems like a nice guy.” hey now...
Jus stapled my finger.
I wanna fuck so good...sry just being honest! Lol
Um, that's an amazing statement.
Valid. I'm just too lazy to make/find another.
The rangers are insane right now!!
My name is Frank Odia and I am a recruiter. I am looking for experienced RoR developer. Are you open to contracts or permanent opps?
At least I'll get to catch up on my work...Just praying I don't lose power. Ugh! I thought I left this hurricane nonsense in Miami.
Defense man
funny how my baby waves to me after he's been #bfing for at least five minutes.
not, this pizza is pretty great :) and I like greek drama :)
Nice suits! Way to go!
Listen to Froggy 98.3 today for a cut from the Sticker's latest release - mixed at Market Street Sound.
Absolutely potato pancakes are a must for a fish fry-we'll be adding that search option soon.
Fear not, for I have redeemed you; I have summoned you by name; you are Mine. ~ Isaiah 43:1
5 1/2 hours and i will finally get to play modern warfare 2!!! I can't wait!!!
It's a great weekend with lot's of fun Weddings and events! Brides @ us your wedding and we will RT you!
so missing ur stop m yelling 'fuckin son of a cunt' raises a couple of eyebrows .. so fuckin late :(
We agree, April!
I'll see what i'm doinnn!
Book your next event with us! or contact
i bet we can play your favorite holiday songs-- let us entertain your holiday events! www.supertonicstringquartet.com
so sick...
Hello September, Goodbye August, up yours Wintertime, don't eat Sawdust!!! just a tip there for you, it's very dry!
good morning, everyone!! I have been up since 5:30!!
if you think you’re alone, put on my music cause I’m gonna be there for you.
Total nightmare for a control freak & for students who aren't used to the freedom of decisions.
wow is he that good?
That's actually pretty funny. “: peeing is foursquare for dogs.”
hopefully that knocked something into place for Cruz. One of my underperformers so far
I just got my tickets for The Avengers tomorrow! :')
Instead of a national curriculum for education, what is really needed is an individual curriculum for every child - Charles Handy
he in fact is sexy. along with every band boy! haha
Saying no to pink goop... it's time for
Rabbit Angstrom is a total bastard and I love him. "Rabbit, Run," John Updike.
My buckeyes going end
you know its getting closer to summer because thats when all the whores come out
I have a lot of food at my table and I'm alone. Learn from me, skinny Qdoba loitering hipster teenagers.
Worst day of my life
Nice driving range session today..hopefully can take it on the golf course.
im not really sure what this is? but demi? just one question demi? where is that name from? it sure is differnet! in a good way!
Would love Zane Lamprey's life.
All # combinations of $5M lotto selected- a winner is out there! Hope he/she finds creative ways to #GIVE back to the community!
Bob Hope used to say that but he said it was his wife that wouldn't move to a smaller house.
thanks ur tight dude
I love you way to much to just let you go that easily <3
I feel like everytime I discover a song on the internet its always the first song I hear on the radio in my car
Peace of mind..
check out for updates from #flashbelt 2009! Day 1 Bike ride, massive visuals on buildings, BEER. Can't wait for Day 2 :D
Yup, I agree - but most companies don't, and that's a shame.
Talent Agent Needed...
Up here @ 254 ink across from west end mall ...we getting it N ...20% off tats
Females want a nigga wit a job but if I sell drugs ill still get her huh
LOVING SugarRay's aggressive takes to the hope...
Not taking a dig at you this time. Referring back to a yesterday tweet about teachers thinking we play favorites.
Ian Desmond said during wknd series Phillies were up for the gms and played harder than they usu do against the #Nats, he says thats big
call me
Good work and drive safe!
i dont , they kicked me out.... after my 10 days outdoor , i go to w.r thomas...
Oh, wow! LOL...is the dog THAT bad?
I'm coolin wit my youngest
ha! awesome. At least i know my career has a future with the anklebiters.
I bit my tongue earlier and now i cant stop biting it. uggggghhh it hurts
Too late... We're at home watching Sounders Vs Dynamo...
#milwaukee We make custom products! Stop in, ask questions, get ideas on how to complete your project
This week needs to be over
thanks! :) whats up?
"it's like a country club, but then it gets filled with molecular biologists"
Thanks for the Logo! I put it up as the background on my twitter profile. Looks SWEET!!
Tonight I will be shutting it down club saga come watch epic rap battles good performances n ur boy kdub kill the stage!!!
oh no! U will be missed.
599 set bowling tonight to finish year with 196.5 average. Not bad but got eliminate some of those bad games that keep me from averaging 200
Valentine's Day is secretly one of my fav holidays...
One day I'll be famous and people will actually care what I tweet.But by then.Twitter will be gone probably.
U gave me your mixtape. I represent Holistic Healing & Alternatives (H.H.A). I'm 1 of your Caregiver's there.
SOPA - the classy way of saying "Fuck You Internet"
We love knowing what our fans are up to! Come on down and fulfill your craving
Auditorium is full and there's still a line up the block!!! The revolution is alive and well in Fort Worth!!
For what it's worth, your blog is excellent. I get excited when I see a new post from you.
Change Ppl make me sick
Going to job shadow! This should be fun!!(:
Damn i hope ur alright rae!?
so excited to be going out to #CA World 2011 in Las Vegas next week! Come see #FiberLight by the
And the last pick goes to.... The NC State Wolfpack!
shoutout to thanks for the Follow!!
What an impressive entertaining fight. On both ends. Great fight.
Your own interactive mobile marketing campaign for only... 12cents an hour!!!!
No offense, but I need intellectual stimulation and I feel stupider for just having net you
"I want you to know that I am ready to go heartbeat, my heartbeat. I want you to know whenever you are around I can't speak. I can't speak."
I could tweet 1,000 Times and I would never get a reply. I'll try again next time. Off to bed :l
Wow....so disappointed in a paper I read for years growing up...not anymore! way to support your own
#ImThatPersonWho over thinks things way too much.
Oh my I feel like an old old woman!
Hi Kale, - thanks for following Better Wine Guide, now following you too!
WE ARE MAKING THESE!!!!
Enjoying the #ReutersWebinar on #socialmedia and #journalism. Social media is another tool, good stories rely on real reporting!
Strong but not nightly sellouts. Ask me again next year... RT How is attendance at new Marlins Park?
So far I heard that Abrusci's Italian in Cherry Creek, the Entire Menu is Gluten-Free--which is awesome! I'm craving pasta!
when your computer acts ( politically correct equivalent of " retarted " ) and you want to chuck that shit out the window -_________-
Me thinks I need coffee...I have to deal with these kids...and the slack NYC Public Schools...
Hehe yeah I know. It's freaking addicting!
And captain jack RT : Is Manu coming off the bench again?
Finally got my Starbuck's, got some new clothes & about to do our nails. #lovegirltime <3
I'm starving !
And were off!!! Let the games and Beer Drinking begin!!!
Going fishing so excited me and my bro are gonna catch some sharks wooohooooo
Actors! Please please please send us sample sides! We are working a way to import sides into the app so you dont have to type line by line!!
keep em coming Kyle
I hate that. I never sign up.
If my luggage goes over 50lbs due to paper theres still that stupid fee.. so who cares.
I know right 😢
Ah sweet Sunday
My last 4 dreams have been hyper realistic. Good thing this one was hyper realistic but with a MAGIC BATHROOM.
Nuggs are hanging around...we need to run FAKERS off floor!
You know it's love when it hurts soo badly to see them with another.
Right back at ya , thanks for the love
Kid Cudi literally makes the most chill music, hes such a good rapper<3
This old bitch at work just told me to turn down my radio *side looks crazy bitch* um I forsee that answer as a NO..
and and umm I love to txt and make friends
Of the 3 main CRE lenders (banks, CMBS & life companies), life companies were the only group that resumed normal lending patterns in '11
Yeah keep on running your mouth. See where it gets you.
- do you know the dates for your spring show yet?
#things that i need = my family and dogs
Goodnight all! Happy April Fools Day. :)
I FREAKING LOVE YOU!!!!
Q:What do you do with percussionists that lose one of their drumsticks? A: Stick them up front of the group and tell them to wave their arms
Really hyper today, there's no way I can study with out my adderall
Thirsty Thursday
Pouring here on Madison's Southwest Side. Heading to Monroe -- where it's abundantly sunny -- for a softball game at 5 p.m.
If sings, he should audition for our chorus. Go Cardinals!
Nothing is real.
Just preemptively scolded the dog for things he's yet to do. He kinda gets it. Not at all.
People who act hard , inside they just want 2 be loved
dang language!!! Lol
Current cruise sales: Comp. spa treatment + On Board Credit on select Royal Caribbean sailings; upgrades + OBC on Norwegian.
It advances to a legitimate national championship game against the East or West regional champion. :-)
Regis avenged their pool play loss to Cherry Creek in a classic cross-town rivalry! Centennial League claims 2/3 championships!
....there's ALWAYS a way to TURN a CHALLENGE into a SUCCESS!!! ;-)
lol, I understand but nothing foreal just working..... and you? :)
Gingrich is nothing but a noise maker.
#20ThingsAboutMe 3. I wear glasses and braces but not a smart cookie.
my skin is yellow. not white. Yellow.
bad acl buddie:((((( and okay I will! Thank you!! Goodnight ryan'
shhhh. I'm sleeping
Frost delay, frost delay, frost delay
love your website! Thank you for coming to our event and we hope to see you again soon.
**Request** Our time has freed up a bit, Are you or anyone you know hiring, looking for help, need a dog walked?
poor Brandon...
people who 'like' their own facebook status updates, to you I say, "bravo"
awkward. I'm going sunday
OMG...you walk on the wild side! LOL
Today is soul music day in the salon. #NowPlaying Softest Lips by #EricRoberson. Can't wait for his new CD to drop next month!
That is a goal or at least should be.
you better ♥
Can't sleep °-°
Ha. I dont even have any friends who are girls anymore. Screw this shit. Its fucking ridiculas.
Up on the early side..... Work at 8!
sounds fun.. I need to do that soon.
o. Are they ok??
will be dancing with Jane Lynch (Glee) in the opening number of the 2011 Emmy's this Sunday at 5pm PT on Fox!
is it some sort of stomp the yard recreation?
Day 2 of the BYU #Genealogy Conference. Ready for another day talking travel and
i dont just want to meet him i want to know him :)
A1: Email marketing enhances your credibility and can help differentiate your company
when you want 6 comments on our blog, ask people what they think. When you want 60, give them something to disagree with.
hey waht was the messaqe you send me about ? lol
I guess he just really needed to smoke. I just knew he would light the blunt on the bus just cause he didnt care who saw him!
did u miss me ?
"If you need to get to Manhattan don't stay on this train." -- L train conductor
I hope the latest post presages an announcement re. the much awaited (and lusted after) iOS app. Seriously.
Theme for today - Grow where you are planted
I just like to say a huge sorry for not posting so much! i did what you said, focus on school and get good grades! i have <3
awww cool... & ill be waiting ( :
Welcome new PWA volunteer and May guest blog editor, Sandra !
Wait WTF just happened
“: CRUSASERS WIN!!! Stephens delivers game-winning 3 to propel Men's Basketball to 64-61 victory over Sewanee (TN).”
Progress might have been all right once but it has gone on too long.
Omg all I can say is God is good all the time.
Check your personal dictionary and delete the ones you don't want. Likely under settings, language, keyboard.
Hey, girls on bikes. You're just great.
“: RT : Two superstars can't beat 12 good players”
No laughing in the glasses!!!
#facepalm, THESE ARE THE PEOPLE WHO WILL DETERMINE OUR FUTURE!
that's a lotta miles. Here in DC?
Another day another video put on the first page of google.anyone know a biz owner with an earth friendly biz that want free marketing help
I won't be able to watch them for 2 wks. #youdontknowPAIN</3
There are
dam back that up hallendale
Q3 Using Google docs to create a collaborative grade level poetry book.
DO IT!
Hey Jeff, How are you? <3
Love new ideas. My book 'The Maya Prophecy'(soon to be published)may give a different twist too!!
Well, Facebook seems to think they are. And now they have billion reasons to hope so. ;-)
Sunday morning, rain is pouring.
Imma cold nerd
Lovin it! RT : Modern family time!
#damndjs coming back hard????
#GoodThingsInTheWorld Jordan shoes.
Remember one year ago when we didn't know each other at all? Now I buy stock in straight jacket companies.
went on nbc commenting on laserdude from LA claiming to treat dark circles with what looks like an erbium laser...i am not a believer!!
Joey V, Timmy G out to NC
Im in the studio fina put some new Hits UP for yall stay tune thanks to all my supporter's i do it for yu #Tae Cash
It's ok it's ok it's ok its ok you can run and tell your friends that I'm on
for making smss12 trend... and of course for many other undisclosed reasons :) have a good one
The number is actually to a bridal shop in NYC. They've placed a message on their line informing callers that it's a scam.
totally! shoot me an email, I'll get it to you ()
I finally know what it feels like to be 16 years old! Now I can finally start writing bad rockabilly songs about driving cars!
Just dropped my IPhone cracked the entire back of it...wow this is terrible
It's lol
that's good. it doesn't look too bad.
No you won't...make sure you follow the directions, and you'll feel fantastic.
Thank you! RT : Good book! MT En route to dinner w/Steve Hoffman, fr book The Imaginations of Unreasonable Men
yo. i gave up facebook 4 lent. if u need a chuckle, check out & especially coatesy.
A+ for service so far #montage spa deer valley
Omw to school lets see what today brings
goin to nelson's to ride before it get's dark
that we should be so lucky
Relapse Wednesdays tonight at mokaï 7862829112
Kane, you are gonna be "p'jammin'!" Haha...those things crack me up.
FOLLOW ME!♥ te amo matt♥ :D
ewwwieee. So you're a freshman?
We'll be at Easton from 6-7pm today in front of Panda Express with cheap tickets to Friday's show.
oh that is nice
Downtown at The Gallery, Just got fitted for a show
Yeah, that could be it lol. I use Google Chrome for my streams.
I'M SELLING 2 TICKETS TO THE JUNE 9, 2012 CONCERT IN VEGAS, FACE VALUE. TWEET ME IF YOURE INTERESTED, AND PLEASE RT SO PEOPLE KNOW.
I got a leather one, they're adorable but not obnoxious like 'LOOK AT MY COACH BAG!!!!!!'
"The words you'll most regret are the ones that are left unsaid."
Stupid butt lips. Are they trying to be Bing or something?
ohmygod if you followed me I'd cry tears of joy :'3 you're so incredible :)!
Worry about your character, not your reputation. Your character is who you are and your reputation is what others think you are.
that ur a newbie ? Lol j.k no what do u mean?! Lol
We just tapped Founders Breakfast Stout. It's an American Imperial Stout, 8.3% a.b.v.
great meeting last night, we had a packed house....
The Shuffled Hustle by free preview TODAY ONLY on Amazon Kindle. The Shuffled Hustle II coming soon...
Corporate funded parties in politics are ancient history this system is so old it should be put on display at a museum! 3rd party no strings
Hi, yes I just came from China and began master study at U of Illinois. The CS texts I read are mainly course required ones.
me too i am loosing my freaking mind!!!
Hard to believe anyone would think Romney would support or understand the middle class
why can't I ever be as popular as you?
I don't know about you guys but my 2011 seems to just be one colossal failure.
AT&T U-Verse is not compatible with Macs, but they won't tell you that until after you cancel.
ok we will take a lemonade instead!
Oh i'd love to! Ready? (;
Maryland now up 8-6 with 4 mins to go.....what avery great game. Hopkins owned the 1st half, but Maryland has Dominated the 2nd.
thanks for the RT. I'd live to catch up next time I'm in LA. Hope you both are doing really well!
I love it I love it i love it i love it when you eat it
Dr. Jonathan Clark - The real reason people go into space: the view
Yes! I didn't get to see Crazy Jenny in Poland so I have to see her before we leave Denmark.
fashion is only the attempt to realize art in living forms and social intercourse - francis bacon
obama takes the blame for not explaining HC more clearly, apparently the teleprompter wasn't working properly
No! Do you want me to meet you at South Station later with a hat?
like a page. It's way too long. :/
I can't reply to your DM bc you're not following me.
you gon learn today!
OCR (on-campus recruiting): Marketing Brand Ambassador for Pirate Brands. Deadline to apply: Tues. 1/31
Hey everybody go follow shes cool, and she follows back,!
So my mom is surprising me by coming to visit from Saturday to Thursday!...a little thrilled, a little not, lol.
The thing I hate about resumes and cover letters is that you can ask ten different people and you'll get ten different answers.
Looking forward to #chichat at 11:00! Comedy Wednesday!
My dog is missing and my soul feels dead. I will love you, forever, Zsa-Zsa.
I wish austin would have brought me to NYC!
lucky! lol i get to go in march. how is it there?
My #SuperFan levels will one day be equal to your Napoli #SuperFan levels... I hope.
WORK THAT BATHING SUIT......FIERCE
The stone was rolled away from the door, not to permit Christ to come out, but enable the disciples to go in. Peter Marshall.
It's good thing I am not court side right now! :)
Gettin it in @ 24 hour fitness. I am really not feeling this...BUT I gotta do it..
“: #Scorpio isn't afraid to fight back... & they never back down.”
I hate when people say, "I need my beauty sleep.." Bitch you need to hibernate.
Hahahahahahahahahahahahahahahaha;-) when are you coming down here again?
It makes me sad when I hit 'forgot my password' for a site, and I get emailed my actual password. Please stop storing my passwords.
tragedy of errors. wisconsinites are not used to losing...
Rep. Tim Bishop to speak at 2010 CHEA Annual Conference and Intl. Seminar on January 28. See the Preliminary Program at www.chea.org.
Tom Luna just asked me and wants to walk around holding hands
Preservation of digital books? There's no one in charge!
Bittel The Nine Master Keys of Management
Great Article!
dope work bro!
nf follow back
