Peter Schiff: Hard to tell. It will look pretty bad for most Americans when prices will go way up and they can’t afford to buy stuff. It could also get very bad as far as loss of individual liberty. A lot of people will blame it on capitalism, on freedom, and they will claim we need more government. It could be used as an impetus for more regulation, which would be a disaster, or it could be an impetus to get rid of all the regulation that was causing the problem. But whether we will do the right or the wrong thing here in America, there will be a lot of pain first. We got some serious problems we have to deal with, but we are not dealing with the problems, we only make the problems worse.
M. Blakeman Ingle
Our system is broken. Government serves the interest of big business and big business only serves the interest of a very few, wealthy elites. It’s time to make our economy and our politics work for working people.
In other words, the use of mantras are not God pleasing. God does not want anyone approaching Him in a senseless manner. He wants us to rightfully use the mind He created for us. To approach the most holy LORD of all, without using the gift of our full senses is an abomination and a gross sign of disrespect. It’s being silly — and we are not to act silly before God Almighty. That is sinful.
as the baby Jesus
Homosexuals have chosen the word “gay,” a word that means “happy” or “a lively, merry mood” or “bright, showy,” to describe their lifestyle. In homosexuality’s portrayal in the media and in its publicity by its advocates, that’s what it can appear to be. A fun-loving, free lifestyle. Yet this is only a mirage. Over the years, in every interaction I have had with a person calling their lifestyle “gay,” that same angry fire that my bookstore acquaintance had could be seen in their eyes . Whether it’s been a one-time opportunity to interact with someone who has identified himself as gay or the longer-term weekly counseling of a man who claimed hundreds of partners (and looked as if it were true), a below-the-surface, seething anger has always been present.
They’ve both been hurt too much already, and there isn’t much to say.
I've been such a slacker. I feel muddled, confused, unorganized, sluggish. I have really been considering what I want and how I want to get there but I feel like I'm in a constant state of playing catch up and can't get ahead.
no matter how far we may have strewn – is simply beautiful.
After my own scripture and prayers, and a bit of time in the bathroom to get ready, I will then start getting breakfast ready. I am trying to be better about making breakfast for Steve before he leaves. Many of my breakfasts I will prep the night before so it's easier in the morning.
Mom was pessimistic and tried to dissuade me. But already a budding foodie and curious about most things culinary, my argument was simple. We liked fruit. We like cake. We liked my grandmother’s blueberry cake which combined fruit and cake. It only made sense that we would like this fruitcake from Texas.
Ps. Sophie's coming back in a week! I haven't seen her like at all this summer. miss u!
23. Just Another Girl Called Judy - 1964
-John Waters
Whoever penned this has serious issues if you ask me. Not just insane, doubly so if you work it out. I don't know what else to say really, I'm a bit lost for words with this one.
Los Angeles County Arboretum & Botanic Garden
Confession 2 is towards my blogger friends.
The two hours that we talked at a little round table, sharing a pot of tea, went extraordinarily fast and we seemed to be able to chat about all sorts of things quite easily.
Jana Greene
Ethel looking very proud, with Kate at Willie's wedding in 1941, when she would be 49.
As we move through life, our opinions and ideas change. Sometimes we unconsciously or mindlessly operate from an older belief system when really we have shifted. We want to respond in one way, but we surprise ourselves by habitually responding in a different way. What do you believe, in the here and now? The following exercise gives you a chance to see
Leather against my skin, all is just right
"The question is: How do you do that without encouraging other people to game the system in the future?" he said in a recent interview. "And how do you do that in a way that doesn't lead to chain migration?"
- 2 egg whites
“Ah. Yes. Your new man friend. He does not exist.”
We filled our plates and adjourned to the table to enjoy the bounty. Things were going along swimmingly for about 15 minutes, when suddenly T.A. began to feel unwell. The "bounty" wasn't agreeing with him at all. Now in addition to the sore throat, he had an upset stomach. He left the table to go lie down on the same sofa that Maddie had just vacated. M-t-G just nibbled at her food (no joke intended!). Ratchlet still had a scrunched up, pinched look, meaning her head still hurt. Not a good sign....nope, not going well at all! None of them were seriously ill, so I wasn't actually worried, but it was kind of a downer, ya know?
Classic children's fiction for the 8-12 age group demands adventure, and the first book in John Dougherty's Bansi O'Hara series offers thrills and dangers aplenty.
so you could go and terrorize
KABUL: The Taliban militia announced they would launch their annual “spring offensive” across Afghanistan on Thursday, threatening to target US-led NATO troops and their allies with renewed vigour.
Do you recall the media kerfuffle about Sarah Palin’s “crossshairs” and how they blamed her (and the Tea Party) for the shooting of Gabrielle Giffords (which was actually done by an extreme leftist).
After the goal, Villa’s tails were up, while we allowed our heads to drop. Our front two looked off the pace and were isolated as our midfield dropped even deeper. Forwards and midfielders seemed to be on different wavelengths, with runs poorly timed or non-existent. Our wing play became less effective, our passing got worse and we were reduced to aimless punts that rarely found their target. For all that though we nearly got back on terms near half time when a good cross from Etherington was headed just over by Jon Walters.
Now as you breathe-in envision Brandon, Jason, Juan and Peter
wow! i almost forgot i had this blog! okay, not really. in fact, during all this time that i have not been blogging here, i've come across many inspiring things that i wanted to write about.
"We're sorry but we need your expertise, we've set up a temporary office. Please, you know the ropes, you know the drill, we value your input, really."
Carl Schmitt and the Military Commissions Act of 2006
Oh yeah, our Valentines Dance last night was pretty fun. The kids really enjoyed it. They had GREAT decorations, games that the kids liked, and ice cream sundaes and cookies, that my kids LOVED! We stayed for about an hour, and then came back home. I did get a few pics, but my stupid camera wasn't taking clear pictures. You know, I think I should just go out and buy a cheap one from Wal-mart. At least that way it would fit in my purse, and I'd have it when I needed it. And those take decent pictures. To get a camera that takes FABULOUS pictures, you need to spend more than $150. That's just the cold, hard facts I'm afraid :)
However, intuition can be a tricky subject. I have dealt with many clients who confuse delusions or illusive tendencies with intuition. This could be misguiding to them, creating anxiety and confusion. The reason for this is that while intuition is something we all have and can access, it needs activation.
do with enjoying them in the yard.
You can check out the full story about Olly Cromwell, the Bexleyheath councillors and the latest updates on #c*ntgate HERE. And, if you should be reading this Olly, I’m stunned at the outcome so you must be feeling like you’re leaving in an absolute nightmare.
go home with a lovely keepsake that will be ready to just add your photos to and it’s sure to be
But the opposition is also deeply sceptical Assad will carry it out, believing he has accepted the plan just to win time while his forces continue their assault to crush the uprising.
It's interesting that even though I have been through so much, and I know how suddenly life can change, I can still get caught up in the day to day craziness of life, without realizing that I am failing to stop, and take time to enjoy all of it! So as I come up on this milestone anniversary, I am taking some time to reflect, and take stock of my life now. I am so grateful for my good health. I will re-focus, and make adjustments, where my life is out of balance.
Hear me tell you I…forgive.
I figured this would be the opportune time to start my newest weekly blog that will highlight and rank Wyoming’s eight NJCAA Division I men’s basketball teams. The hardwood has been full of excitement through about the first third of the Wyoming college hoops season and this week’s rankings indicate just how close a handful of teams are at the top. There are currently five (more than half) teams in the Cowboy State’s junior college ranks that have already hit double-digits in the win column. And if those teams can stay hot, this may just be one of the most exiting years in Wyoming junior college basketball.
Walker made Ten High Bourbon at its Illinois plant. That brand is now made by the Sazerac owned Barton distillery. (Here's a review of Ten High from the pre-Sazerac Barton distillery). Ten High was, and continues to be a budget brand; they distillery also made Walker's Deluxe.
and I can not sew it up,
TURKUAZ
Hi Everyone! Just thought I'd blog about how my Christmas turned out, I hope every one of you all had a wonderful celebration with family and friends. Christmas is my absolute favorite holiday and every year I always look forward to decorating with my family and best of all getting a freshly cut Noble Fir, just love the smell of it. It's definitely a blessing to have my family all gathered at my house to open up gifts. The best is when my mom always cooks up a fantastic meal for all of us. Below are just a few shots I took on my phone of the girls on Xmas morning.
I am glad to have them.
It's a Wonderful Life ... NBC ... 8 PM *FAVORITE CLASSIC
* Male / Female
Never thought I'd be so damn happy for a result to be glandular fever but considering the other option was leukaemia, I am ecstatic.
Recept: That's what I've been trying to tell you, Mr. President.
Happy Stitching w/whatever you're working on!
Anyway, back to this picture, it reminded me a little of what I’ve just written. I’ve always regarded myself as the red connection. The outsider, the one that’s different. Made to be because the others are joined together and you’re left on your own. I’ve not really seen that as a problem, because I’m very independent, I’ve had to be!
Yes! For me it was important and empowering. I had a good friend Terry that had gone through it a year before. I immediately felt I should have been more sympathetic to her, listened to her better, and I should have asked more questions. But she understood, never felt I was insensitive, and she volunteered to answer every tiny question I had, happily.
The pics were taken inside Madpotter's pottery, and those are his pieces around mine.
Module 8 provides an in-depth exploration of service-orientation, service-oriented architecture and SOA design patterns, including those that relate to the Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) and Orchestration.
“Yes,” she answered while sitting up more so she could actually see the men in the front seat.
-my daughter won the division soccer tournament, got braces and grew 2 inches.
He never played. With just the hint of a smile Meg looked in her mother’s face, “Michael?”
To all my new Jedi Followers: Thanks so much for following! I'll get to following back as soon as I can :)
it has been sitting, unfinished, in my living room for a year now.
In the interview Harvey didn’t give much details of their ‘romance’ but said they had been friends for years before growing closer after Cheryl had split with her ex – husband Ashley Cole: “We started confiding in each other. A lot of it was like: “We can’t trust anyone out there, so we’re just gonna trust each other.”
Are these things really providing security or taking it away? It's such a slippery slope when you have weapons like these available to law enforcement. What happens when young street protesters push to strongly against the police during a occupy 'event'? What keeps someone high up from pressing the button on those 'enemies from within'?
You can make calls, browse the web and snap photos with it but this sleek black touchscreen phone isn’t the first BlackBerry 10 phone we’ll see around autumn 2012.
“We could cover one of the windows!”
It wouldn’t happen now; but still,
Good night,
Mother's Day also helped alleviate any lingering worries. My two made the best breakfast I've had in a long time. It was scarfed down and gone before I realized I should have taken a picture; the presentation was remarkable.
Let's begin.
I highly recommend this message by John Lynch. Tina told me about it about 4 years ago I went and found the audio and then bought the book. I have listened to it 25 plus times I have taught on it. It is in video now. It will wake us up from the drudgery of trying to please a God who is already pleased.
The cupcakes are made with Dutch-processed cocoa (I get mine at Penzey’s or Surfas) and the peanut butter is Skippy creamy (you need a non-natural peanut butter so the, um, chemicals and emulsifiers keep the stuff together).
Both of them delight in the beauty of the place, at the same time.. and in one shot (not in this video) they occupy the same exact place at the same instant. The human can’t see the Deva and the Devakanya is not interested in the manava and does not notice him at all. How the ordinary chap marries the ultimate in beautiful princesses, the daughter of the king of the Devas forms this superlative magical tale, with fantastic songs, humour, fights and victory of good over bad!
Since moving out here, Indie has backtracked a little on her night sleeping so we are in the process of fixing that as soon as possible. My eyes burn all day long as my night's sleep has likewise backtracked. Aside from that, she's smiling all the time now and loves squealing and kicking her legs to Ellen. She gets the whole kitchen wet when I bathe her because she just loves to kick those legs. She absolutely hates riding in the car, I think because she needs constant entertainment and staring at the back of the car is not that cool. My rotator cuff is frequently sore from reaching back and putting her binky in her mouth. Needless to say, I now hate riding in the car too. Notice a pattern? If Indie doesn't do it or doesn't like it, neither does mom.
2. I usually only piant my nails on my left hand, that's why my left hand is stained and my right hand isn't.
It was then that I realized, regardless of the biopsy results... whatever was in my lungs, was there, the only thing that was up to me, was how I was going to deal with that.
I didn’t know it until I happened onto Lenore’s blog, but I’ve been a Free Range Parent for my kids’ entire lives. And I was raised by a Free Range single mom. I was a Free Range Kid!
However I’ve thought of all the reasons I’ve given up in the past: it was too hard, I didn’t see results fast enough, I thought I wasn’t worthy of the end goal, I doubted myself too much, I let someone talk me out of what I wanted….
HMAM
So, why we need real authentic Sushi in US?
Awww man, snowflakes falling in October! Bundled and shivering, you could see my smile from the moon! I love the cold, crisp air - it wakes your ass right up! Some see sneezes, I see sweaters. Something had to make up for the horrid & unmissed humidity here. Still I'm readjusting to the rain and actual "weather." Hehe! I'm still expecting perma sunshine. Perhaps the lack of meat on my bones will have me singing a different tune come late November, but I doubt it. :P I'm not physically equipped for these chilly temps, but I'm prepping for winter already! Now I'll get some good use out of what remains of my sweater stash. I thought I was inspired before...WheeEEE! I've missed my seasonal bundling...I made need to be sedated - the excitement is killing me.
Sweet malty smell to it, which should make it a German. It has the right hops hit to it as well.
My intention was to complete the loop and go all the way from the bridge-side of trail to the causeway/traffic circle end and back to the bridge. However, due to the fact that I only began the trek at almost 19:30, I didn’t make it all the way to the causeway as the sun was beginning its descent to the horizon and daylight would start to fade soon afterwards, so the decision was made to turn around when I was approximately 3.2km in. The other downside is that the trail is unlit and tricky in some spots, a great combo for stumbling and tripping in the dark.
Your Sunday suit slides
Anyway, I just wanted to share. I love it. Did I mention that?
I don't know much about the sets these are from, but this first one is from 1939 so the war had just begun, but not for the US yet where the set was printed. They seem to be pretty rare and auctions at real auction houses usually have full sets going for outrageous prices.
Now, I’ve been following Katherine; a young lady who is almost a legend in the costuming world around here, for quite a while. She is amazing. Her website is addictive, so before you click through, finish up reading this post, because you’ll forget all about it once you start browsing her photo-essays of her various costume projects. Katherine tackled a number of Regency pieces. One of these includes her Regency riding habit. Her project photos are enlightening—and explain a lot about construction.
Do that all time? We don’t do that any of the time. How can someone have a break from something they don’t do? How can she want to have a break from me? Should I be offended?
Stand Up
started for. I want this to be about me and the dreams and wishes I have, to be about my days- good or bad, and most importantly my family.
The book is all about different moods and the message of the book is to be happy hippo--not an angry duck! It's funny because even though it's a kids book, I actually took something away from it. This situation I'm in seems impossible sometimes, but it's really important that I act like a hippo and not a duck. I can't change what's happened and honestly I'd rather do this than have my girls in the NIQU, so I really have to try to maintain a positive outlook--even when I'm homesick and missing my husband more than anything.
However, I wanted to see this place too!
do so with truth
Boots: Coach
For Barbara Barry Citrine Tea Syrup, you will need 1/4 cup Citrine Tea by Barbara Barry; the zest and juice of 1 lemons. In a small sauce pan, combine tea leaves and lemon zest and juice with 1 cup sugar and 1 1/2 cups water; bring to a boil, let the sugar dissolve, and remove the pan from the heat. Let liquid cool; strain through a fine sieve. Use about 2 teaspoons of syrup per flute of champagne.
aimlessly driven, like all lovers, searching
$14.00-$18.00
Binge on clouds of blooming trees painting the landscape in swathes of colour.
I have had the honor of designing for Sketches4All. I love the warm community, the great gallery, contests, and challenges our members offer. It is always a joy to share my life and my work there!
Greg Laurie, the best-selling author of The Upside DownChurch (a Gold Medallion winner) and Lost Boy, is senior pastor of Harvest Christian Fellowship in Riverside, California, one of the largest churches in America. His syndicated radio program, A New Beginning, is broadcast around the world.
“What the Big Ten said last week got everybody’s attention,” said Cobb, a former football player at N.C. State. “What it really showed is that the gap in college football is not between Division I-A and I-AA. It’s between the BCS schools and everybody else Division I-A.”
Lizzie Hood and Evie Verver are thirteen-year old best friends and next door neighbors. On afternoon, Evie disappears and Lizzie appears to be the last to have seen her. While trying to assist with the official investigation, Lizzie also sets out on her own secret mission to find the truth. Was Evie kidnapped? Did she run away? Will she ever come back?
As you all know, there are SO MANY opinions/methods out there. Veganism, vegetarianism, food combining, raw foodism, etc. It's incredible the options we have these days from cloth diapers to salad dressings to house plans. Can we say overwhelming?
You gotta move, move, move, around and ’round.
Before his final release in 2000, prison officials referred him for evaluation as a sexually violent predator. In 2010, a state psychologist concluded he could be safely released under supervision because of his age and Landau petitioned for his release, but the director of the Coalinga State Hospital disagreed with the doctor’s assessment.
Not really much to report today. We had a horrid doughy scone spread with thick margarine that stuck to the roof of your mouth for breakfast in a bakery in Renmark. Then rode 150 gentle kilometers into Mildura which is quite a large town in the north of Victoria.
I'm not Catholic, but from what I understand, Mardi Gras is an opportunity for Catholics to eat all the fattening foods they can before the beginning of Lent (which starts tomorrow, Ash Wednesday). But for midwesterners we also think of Fat Tuesday as Paczki Day! Growing up, I thought eating paczkis was the way everyone acknowledged Fat Tuesday, but it turns out it's a bit more of a midwestern thing, due to the large Polish communities in the midwest. So in case you've never heard of them before, paczkis are a polish donut and just thinking about them makes your butt grow two sizes.
Honestly, it took me a few different APA beers to figure out this NW style, the local ingredients are very different than those from the Midwest American Pales that I am used to.
In actuality, the truth is something different and the answer is far from black and white. A number of organizations, groups and individuals disagree with some of the pronouncements of NOAA. They may question their methods of scientific assessment, alleging that NOAA is relying on "out-dated science." For example, NOAA conducts trawl surveys to help ascertain the biomass of different fish species. But within the last ten years, these surveys have come under fire, most notably in the Trawlgate episode where NOAA admitted that some of their assessments had been incorrect due to problems with the equipment they were using.
When my parent's marriage ended, it broke me. Things like that hit all of us differently, but for me, it was this nearly fatal blow that took me out for years. I was angry with God and I was angry with my parents. I had no clue how I would ever find healing in that place or even be able to stop asking "why?"
Do you remember when I took you fishing? The only time I took you fishing? I caught the ‘big one’ and you made me let it go. I didn’t mind really, although I acted like you were ripping my heart out. What killed me though was when you refused to even take a picture for me. You told me that it was a living creature and I had no right to brag about capturing it. You said I had to simply keep it in a memory. We argued and you refused to budge. You looked at me and said ‘Luke Montgomery, you bragging about catching this fish is just like you bragging about catching me! It’s a living creature. You shouldn’t brag about catching a girl OR a fish.’
On the topic of work, I am divided on the issue. I enjoy chatting with the lonely customers. I feel like I am providing them with a place for them to go to talk to another human. However, I find that I would like to be a writer or maybe even a pastor. I know that I’d take some Bible classes at a Seminary and some classes on writing too. Other times, I want to run as fast I can from working in retail. I hate when a customer treats me like crap. I hate when a customer complains about a 50 cent difference in a price. Then we go look at the tag and she ends up having misread the tag. (Please note that the item was on clearance at probably 75% off.) Is it really worth holding up a line to get fifty cents? I have had some refunds that were less than a dollar too. Why does a person return something for less than a dollar? I sometimes think that the time and paper is worth more than the refund. So, as you can see, I am divided on this issue. I could see working in a social service organization too. The money would be nice to pay for the taxi so that I could work whatever hours that they needed. It would be fulfilling at times to actually help people rather than sell cigarettes, alcohol and lottery tickets. These items don’t help anyone. But feeding the hungry, caring for the homeless, being with those who feel abandoned, crying with the mourning or hurting can help others.
Biggest disappointment – still doesn’t make sense because he’s a great artist, and they’re great songs, but it’s CD 4: Making Mirrors by Gotye.
In the spring, when ships sailed from land to land, Gunnlaug prayed King Ethelred for leave to sail somewhither; the king asks what he was about then. Gunnlaug said, “I would fulfil what I have given my word to do,” and sang this stave withal:—
Lucifer’s Friend went on to make a few more albums but changed their style quite a bit from the debut, which is where Night Sun comes in. Another German band with a high pitched screamer and pounding organist, this sounds like it should have been the second album from Lucifer’s Friend. Their debut album Mournin’ from 1972 has been described as Lucifer’s Cousin or Lucifer’s Friend That Came With The Other Guy.
April 29 – Edmonton Event Centre (Edmonton, AB) #
Rotated his body a full 360 degrees!
What may follow may seem harsh, as I can say I did not hate the film, but the reasons that prevented me from not caring a whole lot about it are recurring problems in many films, particularly in the last decade. As much as I have read many critics accuse Scorsese's "The Departed" of being a sell-out project where he provided a more commercially-acceptable version of his previous gangster sagas, I have to say that Scorsese's chasing of trends, particularly in "The Aviator" and now "Shutter Island" bothers me more. "The Aviator" contains some of his most impersonal filmmaking, a trendy by-the-numbers biopic with a CGI-aided glossy aesthetic housed in a self-important shell as Oscar bait that I could not honestly differentiate from the works of Ron Howard. It seemed like Scorsese wanted to convey the beauty of flying because he felt the audiences would lap up the ride, even if his direction demonstrated that he had no understanding of what that experience truly feels like. This was a grounded filmmaker trying to convince us that he had wings.
Muslims are the lowest of the low, they are a vile excuse for a race of people who don't care less for anythig or anyone. The only thing they do care about is world domination and sex with children, in some countries Muslims are even allowed to have sex with animals and in some cases they have had to marry them.
“You’re not serious!”
Look! The Sun has lost its glow. The planets war with one another in the sky. Ghosts possess people, who howl as if they were on fire!
After 10 years in The Knoxville Home we were bursting at the seams. We had just had our second girl, A, and it was a tight fit. Our friend, Gail had gotten her real estate license and she was on the hunt for something for us. As it turns out she found a beauty down the street from her and Kelly. We were in heaven as we were always getting together to play cards and hang out as Kelly was The Hubby's best bud. The house was perfect for me and it had a POOL! I was ecstatic but The Hubby, not so much but he was a good guy and knew it was best at the time.
Have some characteristics of Victorian social housing but maybe its a bit too fancy for that. It's close to the Gare du Lyon.
"Oh God, it's 4.03, I have to get up in three hours."
boxer-babe
This was played to perfection by Bobby, who seems to have the spirit of a child. The Permanent Midnight reference was off the hook. B+
1/2 tsp. cayenne pepper (optional)
Here's what Wikipedia says as a reminder:
We are so excited to present the Mother Load Mother's Day Giveaway Event where ONE mom will take home the whole shabang!
Living human beings are so pitiable…
The problem is, the savings I’m talking about is actually my retirement savings.
The Embassy put on a great 4th of July community celebration, complete with fireworks and patriotic tunes. I must admit, as the fireworks were going off over the city of Yerevan, and God Bless America was playing in the background, I got a little teary eyed! This being our first 4th of July abroad, it was definitely a day to remember!
Long live Islam, long live Islam.
Holy time, healing news
So my blogging is becoming more and more sporadic. Is that how it will always be? Or will I settle into a rhythm and start thinking and reflecting again?
That media buys are essential to a campaign dovetails with Stevens’ later observations on the distinctions between policy and media in the course of a campaign. Karl, of course is, well, you can guess who Karl is.
I have very sensitive skin. Not to the point that I get rashes or irritation, but to the point that I have to be very careful about which products I use on my face because I get red itchy eyes, super dry skin, and the occasional small bumpy breakout. Recently, I wanted to find something more natural to put on my face. Something that didn't have many ingredients and something that didn't have the undesirable parabans and chemicals.
There are many things that are impeding the progress of the sport of track and field. One of the big ones is the lack of competition among the world’s top male sprinters. Every era that has thrived has done so on the backs (feet) of the thoroughbreds of the sport going at it with regularity. Jim Hines, Charlie Greene, John Carlos, and Tommie Smith in the ‘60’s. Steve Williams, Don Quarrie, Silvio Leonard, Hasley Crawford and Harvey Glance in the 70’s. James Sanford, Carl Lewis, Calvin Smith, Stanley Floyd, Raymond Stewart, and Ben Johnson in the 80’s. Carl Lewis, Linford Christie, Leroy Burrell, Dennis Mitchell, Donovan Bailey, Bruny Surin, Ato Boldon, Maurice Greene and Frankie Fredericks in the 90’s. It’s no coincidence that attendance at meets was high, and there were a lot more meets during these eras. And the funny thing is that some of the most revered names in the sport reside among that list – competing often and even losing didn’t seem to harm their legacies.
Did you know that I even have the power to read ALL the books “HE” wants to read. Somehow I suppose, he is able to extract the knowledge from the books from me to him through osmosis. (Actually, that is one that I would LOVE to know how to do) Oh, the books I would read…
At the time I was listening to a Frank Turner song and the lyric, You dance as if you’re hours away from death, jumped out at me. Bouncing ideas off my mum, she suggested I link it to the Rite of Spring, as dancing to death and Stravinsky go hand in hand.
Start by selecting what you would like to cut out. I wanted to cut out the children's names... so I did a J&E. I used my Cricut. You can pretty much put anything. I cut it out twice, because I didn't know which direction it would need to be on the ornaments. You can know that it is the correct way, not the backwards way. Then you put that on the ornament... being that ornaments are round and the letters were made on a flat piece of paper... you need to make small cuts in it to be able to get it to go around the ornament in a way in which all the little pieces go down... take your time...
Some other important ‘need-to-know’ stuff:
And death, which I have always regarded as the greatest dimension of life, dark, compelling, was no more than a pipe that springs a leak, a branch that cracks inn the wind, a jackets that slips off a clothes hanger and falls to the floor.
Ale to the Chief. A 100% Brettanomyces beer reminiscent of a Belgian Pale, but hopped with American cascade and dry hopped. Brewer, Steve ‘The Breeze’ Breezly.
Please click on the links below for easy access to these posts.
I think that the key is to not expect your home community to be Buenos Aires, or to compare it to Buenos Aires. That is not fair, there is no possible way your home tango could stand up to Buenos Aires. Mecca is Mecca and no place else can come close. So to constantly compare the two can only lead to disappointment and depression. In my mind anyway. Maybe that is a bit Pollyanna of me, but it is how I am approaching this re-acclimation.
(COMMERCIAL BREAK)
1/4 a cup of toasted Walnuts
*Dress like a bug and carry an apple…”Fruit fly”
- Date of birth
Ah. Spring.
There were some pretty great costumes as well. But both my daughter and I left saying, what was up with that blue dress and the bright orange bow that Snow wore in the closing scene. ???
PROSPECTS: A new tale from the minds of Pixar and the first non-sequel release by the studio in three years. Pixar still means quality when it comes to computer animation.
The true “evil system” with a clear track record of gulag concentration camps, mass graves, millions of political prisoners, torture, starvation, etc. was the Communist system.
Tom citing reports that Tressel and Satanorum have never been seen together has conclusively concluded that Tressel and Satanorum are indeed one and the same person. Further evidence that this is true was offered by The Donald Trump who says hat he has not seen Satanorum’s Birth Certificate.
It should come as no surprise that it's a Night Shade published title. Putting aside its similarity to Glen Cook, one of Night Shade's most prolific authors, Scourge of the Betrayer screams 'new voice'. Like last year's God's War (Hurley), it isn't reinterpreting old genre conventions, but finding entirely new pathways. Once again I find myself applauding Night Shade for its editorial vision, further cementing them as my go to source for something I've never seen before. I can't wait to read whatever's next for Jeff Salyards. His debut can't be considered anything but a tremendous success.
Raising her head slowly, she looked across to her friends. They both changed the topic, helping spare Leigh the embarrassment she was privy to. Naturally they were right, they always were. After a few days she could forget about Christian. She’d be able to surpass this event, she always did. Hopefully this other girl knew what she was getting into.
The IPKat notes that this ruling was preceded by three days in court, back in October. He wonders whether the parties, neither of which is exactly impoverished (Specsavers' revenue topped £1 billion in 2008/9 and Asda is the local presence of Walmart), needed to spend so much cash and effort in tussling over the sums involved here -- and whether there were better things for the Court of Appeal to be getting on with.
Then I see my friends
Alas, Sam has no bearings on where they are, so she cannot plot a course back to Earth. Thor shows up, seemingly to save the day, but in reality to request help. The Replicators have overrun the Asgard homeworld. To be continued…
This is music for late at night and listening to on your own. It demands attention and once you have tapped into its aural fractals it is hypnotically addictive.
I didn’t think so either.
I'll be reconnecting with old friends.
THE FAMILY: Don’t you love it when Eli reads someone nasty the riot act? This time he storms Jackie’s hospital room and says that she better apologize to Alicia because Peter can’t get the governorship without her. When Jackie does apologize, Alicia tells her that she will be signing Florrick’s old home over to the kids, or go to jail for using the kids’ trust funds for a down payment. We also start to notice that not all is well with Jackie’s mental state.
Chaplain, James Potter said: “We have been encouraging students to take on their own personal challenges and put their faith into positive social action. Some have organised sponsored silences, stand ups and fasts. We have also held cake sales and one student managed to raise £329 on his own by holding a sponsored swim.”
Love Is A Rose
Bless You My Son 2:00
The selection of what kind of liver pate to use wasn’t that complicated since Mommy Ryan had a block of duck liver mousse in her fridge. She is a Ryan after all, and odds are that if you look in a Ryan fridge or freezer there will be some form of liver product somewhere. Makes choices in these situations easy.
by southern rains or footprint on the ground,
Petronet LNG Ltd
the church clock chimes 10
I sold my house and used the equity to purchase the equipment for my new studio. Then I bought a house where I could actually have my studio as well as my home. It was up and running before my six months disability leave was over. Also, several of my major clients at the cable company – people I had made commercials and programs for for years – were not pleased at all by the actions of the company towards me. They were glad to follow me and help establish my new business. Five years later, some of them are still crucial to my success.
Supposedly, yes. Barangay election is a non-partisan political exercise. But to find a Barangay in the whole country where there is absence of partisan exercises is very difficult.
We give gifts throughout the year, whether or not there is a specific occasion. Our generosity is often by choice but we are also spurred by cultural traditions and social obligations, and for reasons varying from affection to reciprocity to entirely self-serving motives. With each presentation, there is a message: Thinking of you. Thank you. I love you. I owe you. You owe me... The message, like the gift, is personal and yet, it can also project beyond its giver and receiver, and signal outwardly to others an image of the lives of and relationship between the main participants. This is not lost on marketers and advertisers, who fill airwaves and glossy pages with ad campaigns depicting rapturously happy people exchanging luxurious presents, in hopes that viewers might be persuaded to emulate them through their purchases. At the very least, they have succeeded in convincing many people (myself included) that the highest value gifts can only be found in the marketplace.
mHealth apps abound that are trying to mobilize health workers worldwide. I recently came across a pitch for an mHealth app through a listserv I am a member of. The project, now in the Rising Stars in Global Health Challenge contest hosted by Grand Challenges Canada to win funds to pilot its technology, focuses on helping HIV/AIDS workers in Indonesia better reach and monitor their patients.The designers of the app, Kate Otto–creator of blog Everyday Ambassador–and her partners at Rumah Cemara, hope that their concept can help bridge the data gap between the 40 Peer Support Counselors (PSC) and the more than 6000 patients they serve. Rumah Cemara is a drug rehab and HIV/AIDS community-based organization located in West Java, Indonesia. Here is the summary of their idea, which can be implemented using a mHealth app called CommCare.
I’ve also signed up for the Hook, Line, and Sinker blogfest, which looks like a lot of fun. If I don’t post an entry for that on February 13th, remind me, okay? I have this horrible habit of forgetting blogfests that I’ve committed too. Hopefully, I’ll have the first 1000 words or so of ‘The Scroll’ ready to tease by then.
Wearing: Michael Stars top, thrifted jeans, cape, and belt, gifted boots, and old scarf
Today will be like most days; productively busy with attention on what I eat, frequent blood sugar monitoring, a walk with Tim and tremendous thankfulness to be this healthy at 33 years and counting.
Manas, a co-presenter of SABC2's Morning Live show, was sitting with her best friend at Olivia's Confectionary & Coffee Shop when the robbers struck. Her friend, whose name Manas did not want to reveal, was wounded during the robbery.
Share your smile with someone today. You never know…someone could really use it!
To read more about my layout, see close-ups, and to get challenge details, visit this post. And if you haven't seen the latest Scrapbook Circle kit, you must! It's filled with new Heidi Swapp and Amy Tangerine and I'm in love :).
c. Do another final draft after the editor hands it to you: This will save you the headache of going back and revising it. However, if people complain about (insert typo) or you feel the novel could use a little nip and tuck post-publication, there’s nothing wrong with going back to the drawing board and improving it.
For 2010 the car was designed with a DDD in mind, Newey was able to repackage the pull rod set up for even larger tunnels. He said that the choice of Pullrod for 2010 was still not the obvious way to go, but the team decided to stick with a proven pull rod rear end, rather than have to design an all new rear end. Other teams also looked at the feasibility of a Pullrod rear end, However no other teams followed this design path, with the exception of the Toro Rosso team who used the RB5 design in 2009 and simply revised it for their 2010 car. For 2011 the DDD is banned, with revised wording in the technical regulations outlawing the openings beneath the car to allow air to flow into the upper diffuser deck. Thus again we will see teams consider the pull rod layout for better airflow to the rear wing.
This chapter of my life is titled "My Personal Struggle". It involves guilt ridden realizations that motivated me into taking responsibility for the food choices that I have made for my family and dedication to breaking the cycle.
My daughter isn't perfect but I know when she is telling me the truth.
With Earth Day 2012 upon us, it is once again time to draw attention to the environment. Although this should be a given in today’s day and age. This blog post is my second Punk Rock Wisdom post here, and will identify three punk rock songs that have brought attention to climate change (and one bonus video at the end)
This little table is adorable as an end table or a hallway table, or just a decorative table. I love the antique look of it and the shabby-chic paint job. I think $65 is a fair price for it too. The only downside is this is a pick-up only item, but I suppose thats good news for all of you who live in and around NJ because thats less competition for you to get this! Of course I could always stop on my way to NC and get it for myself...
Have a wonderful and safe weekend. Thanks for stopping by and taking a look!
Some tidbits I’ve told my children:
Who this works for:
10 mint leaves
Starting today for reasons I can not determine I could open blogger but I could not view my blog. I had all dashboard functions available except view blog. View blog would give me a blank screen.
Let me return to the Roth quote. Why does he feel that readers are declining by the decade? I think to be fair to Roth, he is perhaps referring to what he sees in his eyes as the ‘true’ reader. He may even be tending toward what would be considered the ‘literary reader’. And if he is solely referring to the ‘literary reader’, then, he is probably correct. Yes, our poor literary reader is like most general readers—punch drunk from an industry publishing more titles that at any time ever before, and trying to market and reach out to its consumer in a media market saturated to the brim with messages and products we can’t live without.
Mary passed away last week.
Many scientists have demonstrated the manner in which colonies of bacteria will often shift back and forth between star and distributed network formations, based upon the amount of resources in a given area. What produces the need for centralization is thus scarcity, or in terms of populations of humans, ‘fear.’ Fear creates star networks, while greater relaxation produces distributed networks.
And he says it won’t take me long. Just a few days. Don’t forget about me, okay?
I’m no fan of ISAF reporting, and reading through the latest 1230 report isn’t making me happy, but ISAF never reports wounded, only fatalities.
This is essentially a book that deals with the racial prejudices of yesterday and today. It’s a complicated subject, and certainly not one that I feel I can address entirely in one book. But I do think that any time we hear a new story it gives us a fresh perspective on our world and helps us to see things just a little bit more clearly.
Note: Ajinomoto isn’t something that should be used in cooking regularly. It has a chemical called Monosodium glutamate (MSG) and although it may add flavour to Chinese cooking, it may have harmful long-term effects. Please limit the use of ajinomoto in your cooking. You can avoid it completely in this recipe if you like.
‘Our fellow Beings were not spared
i want to dress like a scrapbook
If Barack and Genevieve were in social occasions as a couple, it was almost always with the Pakistanis. Hasan Chandoo had moved back from London and taken a place in a converted warehouse on the waterfront below Brooklyn Heights. Wahid Hamid, starting a rise up the corporate ladder that would take him to the top of PepsiCo, lived on Long Island with his wife. Sohale Siddiqi was part of the crowd, along with Beenu Mahmood. It was a movable feast, and invariably a matter of bounty and excess, friends losing themselves in food and conversation. Barack for the most part declined alcohol and drugs. “He was quite abstemious,” Genevieve said. She enjoyed the warmth of the gatherings, but was usually ready to go home before him. He was pushing away from the Pakistanis, too, politely, for a different reason, she thought. He wanted something more.
With an unnervingly wide-eyed stare, the slow loris hails from the tropical jungles around Southeast Asia and is notable for its plush but strong limbs. Slow lorises can hang by their feet for hours at a time — and often do.
Brokenness to wholeness…
There are a couple of reasons it’s a downer. First, Infante’s main point is that it’s hard to measure a correlation between cheating and success because we lack adequate tools. You can point to the edges…
This example doesn’t seem like that big of a deal, but it can be really hard to sit back and not say anything when you watch someone shoot up in the bathroom of a gas station, or you film a boy taking 10 prescription pills at once, or you watch a girl try to prostitute herself for drug money. One producer explained that he was filming a young girl who was responsible for taking care of her whole family and was at the grocery store with a check borrowed from a friend when the check wouldn’t go through. She had no other means of paying for the food for her family and she broke down. All of the producer wanted to do was reach in his pocket and get the money for the groceries, but he couldn’t do it. They really do their best to shoot raw footage so the stories of these individuals aren’t altered.
“It means I hope you like pushing a broom.”
Sprinkle on:
Egyptian belly dancer Lucy considers 99.9% of Egyptian belly dancers respectable and honorable, stating that their repeated marriages is better than getting involved in illegitimate affairs. She added that despite the fact she married at the age of 16, she and her husband are still together. May I, as a historian of Egypt, add some support to her remark about belly dancers' believing strongly in marriage? The most famous of them all, and according to a now-departed generation the greatest Egyptian belly dancer of the last century, Tahia Carioca (1919-1999), who should probably someday have a blogpost devoted to her, certainly agreed. She had 14 husbands.
Top 25 iTtunes playlist. I am rebuilding iTunes right now due to a computer crash. Here is my top so far.
So, after seeing it on a bloggy friends blog who is simply too nice to have it ever happen to her I thought I'd do something about it. I figure the direct approach would embarrass my bloggy friend so I've come up with a pledge.
On Friday, according to a court document filed by US prosecutors, Madoff waived a formal grand jury indictment—a legal procedure that means the defendant is negotiating a plea bargain.
4. Caristiona (No. 1 of 'Two Hebridean Sea Poems') 9:31
As it folds and fondles Sin
Students Representative Council (SRC) president Amanda Ngwenya said that although the incident has been well covered by the media, the UCT community needed to recognise what had happened.
*Arterial bleed from a patient's arm...bleeding all over the place. Looked like a murder scene.
Very much in need of a photographic artist to teach in K-12 setting
Can you briefly summarise what the band has been up to since the release of your Split with Ten Speed Bicycle?
I watched the show twice, as it was shown multiple times on BBCAmerica. I would have watched it a third time but I don’t think I could take it, emotionally. I’m exhausted now. I’m also glad that it’s on the DVR, and that I have pre-ordered all of the specials on dvd and will devour them when they arrive in February.
1) GERD - GastroesomethingIdon'tfeellikespellingout reflux disease. Technically, he's been diagnosed with this twice. The first time, he was held down while a scope was inserted up his nose and down his throat (SO much fun!) and they concluded that since they saw nothing, he must have reflux. I was still working on my honorary doctorate at this point, and therefore did not make the connection between "we found nothing" and "reflux". However, despite this, he was put on a medication for it - which he promptly threw up - over and over again. He was then put on another medication, which cost us not only an arm and a leg, but fingers and toes too. After no obvious improvement, he was taken off the medicine. Fast forward a few weeks, we held him down as they inserted another scope up his nose and down his throat (which he hated just as much as the first time) except at that point, his esophagus is inflammed, meaning he has silent reflux. Bad news: Silent reflux is worse, because instead of spewing it out he swallows it back down, allowing the acid to burn his throat twice. Good news: Less puke stains on my shirt. Back onto the ridiculously expensive medicine...
We are lucky that a few times a year grandmas LOVE to take the Littles for days at a time,
For the first time in a while, some actual writing. Here is a poem:
Where Is the Comma?
Debuting under SM Entertainment, one of the country’s best entertainment management companies, is known to be a difficult task. They went through, from one to seven years of preparation before debuting. They can’t ignore the amount of harsh training they went through but the competition between the company’s trainees was, of course, really intense. This is the reason why rookie groups debuting under SM always gather the interest of many. EXO-K’s six members D.O, Kai, Suho, Chanyeol, Sehun and Baekhyun who recently debuted with “MAMA” all already passed these tests once. SM’s rookies of 2012, EXO-K, all personally went through this survival.
And to be honest it isn't the most complicated rule to remember. It is far simpler to get the hang of than, for example, the present perfect. Or the use of "whom," semi colons and even commas.
Impatient, I machine quilted them with Aurifil hot pink MAKO 40wt, which went like a breeze. Things were still going smoothly as I backed the little ones, and then came the moderately difficult step of turning them. Slightly trying but doable. Still trying but doable was getting the magnet squares in (I had to trim mine slightly smaller than instructed). But then came the most difficult task of all - hand-stitching the openings shut. yikes. That part was the least fun, but obviously mandatory, so I suffered through. And am glad I did.
While I do not believe that there are good and evil people, I do believe that there are good and evil ideas. Ideas that foster accurate and clear apprehension of the truth are good. Ideas that propagate life and health are good. Ideas that cloud and obscure the true nature of the universe are evil. Ideas that propagate disease are evil. It is through the replication of ideas or memes and no longer through the replication of genes that human destiny will be determined. Put another way, genetic replication is necessary but not sufficient for any human future worth the name. This is essentially a combination of memetic information theory with Buddhist philosophy.
As long as I sip quickly,
For those of you who have kids be grateful for what you have. Be grateful that you just have to share some ups and downs with an ex-husband. Be grateful that you didn’t get any of that sleep last night. Be grateful that they are emptying your bank account so you can buy them a car. Be grateful that you can watch them sleep each night even if they spent their day spewing teenage angst at you. It could be so fucking worse.
He’s right, with regards to what I would want the end result to be. I wouldn’t risk going through a major operation unless I would feel more confident afterwards. Right now, I don’t feel comfortable without my shirt on, so if an operation doesn’t change that, than what’s the point?
And now onto today's ramblings...
and it just scares me. what the world is coming to. it scares me to think what the world will be like in 10 or 20 years. what will my baby girls think of as 'normal'? because someone walking in to your yard and taking what is yours...from your car or your home...is definitely not what i think should be considered normal. but everytime we tell what happened to us we hear even more stories....
What of Mary's birth? We know little. Yet her birth is part of the greater plan in the birth of Him who was and is incarnate, a divine genealogy. My tradition might question the immaculate conception of Mary yet Jesus' birth demonstrates that nothing is outside His power, "and holy is His Name."
Shovel
The biggest high –point was one of my school visits to the US when a kid came up and said he’d never finished a book and hated reading but he loved Devil’s Kiss. One non-reader had been converted into a reader. That’s a big result.
Life varys…
Serve with the bird.
teacher's knowledge. He could do mental arithmetic mechanically, sing
Bad news today for the McInerney group which has been under examinership protection for nearly four months. The Irish operations of the group had been hoping to obtain approval from the High Court of a scheme of arrangement which would have seen a substantial investment from US funding group, Oaktree Capital and NAMA taking a substantial writedown on its loans to McInerney. Unfortunately in the High Court earlier today, the judge, Mr Justice Frank Clarke is reported to have rejected the proposed scheme of arrangement and the expectation now is that a receiver will be appointed to the group’s Irish operations where NAMA will be the biggest creditor. The judge said he would issue his formal ruling in the matter on Friday 14th January 2011.
She always told me that we weren't allowed to grow up but now that I have you, I know what she meant. There are days that I just want to freeze time so that I can protect you forever. Like this morning, when you fell asleep on my chest, I wanted to stay in that moment forever, just listening to you snore and breathing you in. But just as fast as I wish you would stay 2 months old forever, I can't wait to see you grow up.
In general, there is more information and discussion about various scenarios that may come up when the “mass arrests” occur.
First: the relationship between the DPD and the Duke Police. This issue should have been comprehensively explored by the Bowen/Chambers Committee. But the politically correct duo appeared interest only in information that would cast the lacrosse players in an unfavorable light, and so ignored the matter altogether.
of our favorite bands: Delay, Bomb the Music Industry, and Good Luck.
Unsurprisingly it seems that it is accidents and ill health that cost businesses, and not a preoccupation with health and safety. The Institution of Occupational Safety and Health says work-related accidents and ill health cost businesses nearly £8 billion a year, with absenteeism, low productivity and legal bills among the ‘financial hits’. The Lofstedt report cites 4.4 million working days lost due to workplace injuries and ‘a massive 22.1 million lost due to work-related ill health during 2010/11.’
I fail all the time, like a falling star.
1 Cor. 15: 29
People have started to give immense interest toward house designs, interior, exterior and many other innovative forms available in the modern age building concepts. Interior decoration, painting, furniture and flooring are some of the highlighted aspects with enormous importance at the time of construction. Professionals with knowledge of modern day techniques in the building industry, install fencing panel.
As well as Karen's wonderful digital image sets her store also stocks more than £16,000 of craft products. Karen is offering our lucky winner TWO fabulous digital bundles of their choice.
You promised me everything, you promised me thick and thin, yeah!
This curriculum was an idyllic method to fully appreciate the diverse and interesting aspects of the history of South Africa. But even without travelling at all, the Footprints curriculum package is a wonderful, rich learning experience for those who can read the amazing ‘living-books’, research online and go on some relevant outings!
I swear I’ve never been a subject on Hoarders. I swear it.
Recipe and photo courtesy of Mel from Melskitchencafe.com
Beat the eggs then add to the mix and keep mixing until it looks smooth and glossy.
Nova Star Wrong B
This is NAMA’s second reported residential sale in the borough of Westminster. In March 2011, it was exclusively revealed on here that NAMA was selling the loan in respect of 20 Grosvenor Square back to a consortium lead by Richard Caring. That property is also destined to be converted into luxury flats but Grosvenor Square is superior location, presently home to the US Embassy, and the flats there would be expected to fetch GBP 4,000 psf or indeed more.
We also have our top 3, shortlisted by the DT then given over to Random.org to get to the final 3 as we loved so many of the entries again this week. The Top 3 for challenge 5 are
My Islam is Elijah being carried away by a fire-chariot
Hummingbird Hummmm (Lunge forward, step back)
But after looking at it, I decided that I didn't like the drawers in that spot, so I took them all out again and started over. I put two stacks of three drawers side by side on the floor of the closet once I realized that doing so wouldn't hinder the hanging stuff at all. That left a small square-ish area in the back left corner. I took a chance and tried the stack of two drawers that came from our bedroom to see if they would fit and they did.
I do like to be lazy and not shave for a bit myself (I had a beard, aged 25-50) but, really, if you are going to be in court charged with attempted rape and you know there will be TV cameras there, then do shave, wear a tie and try to look innocent, not like a rather down-at-heel caged wolf.
Your memories of the life you pray for are so far in your distant past, and so well buried, that you can only see faint glimmerings. If we told you who you are and what you are capable of, it would seem to you to be fairy tales. Your past has been so carefully hidden that, when you begin to learn of it, many will refuse to believe it. The technologies that you already possess will beggar your imaginations, and we tell you they do not approach what will be shown you, given to you freely. There are those among you who laugh aloud when they hear of our promises regarding your health and lifespan, but we tell you there are many doctors and researchers already who are not laughing.
Monif GRG. Viral infections of the human fetus. London: Macmillan; 1970.
My SIL Hannah who stays in Ara Damansara buzzed me about this new branch of the famous ngap thui meen (duck drumstick noodle) Pun Chun from Bidor, Perak.
The PT boat cut through the waves riding the growing swells. Sea water pushed aside in folding waves like pigeon wings. All hands were outfitted in foul weather gear.
Continue April 26, 2012: Part 2 of 5
Vampyr is a nearly-silent German film from 1932; director Carl Theodor Dreyer was mostly used to working with silent movies, and while there is a smattering of dialogue (in German, though both subtitled and dubbed versions are available in English), much of the story is told in silent movie fashion, with title cards providing occasional dumps of exposition.
The thing I love about Janet is that she doesn't mince words. She minces bones, and tendons, but not words. If your query sucks, she'll tell you that, and then she'll tell you exactly why. This is not the place for people who say they want a critique but secretly want to be told how great they are. Query Shark will eat you alive.
Tuesday – Homemade pepperoni pizza
I really like liquid soap next to the basin in the kitchen, because it's so easy to just squeeze out some from a pump dispenser when you want to wash hands, and it stays clean and contained...however, the daunting prospect of making liquid soap in the traditional way with cooking in a crockpot, and watching it, and having to use KOH lye etc led me to trying to make the liquid soap using just my cold processed natural soap that had been "curing" for around 3 months.
Here are the top 5:
our future lies,
inside jokes out in the public
Hello again...wow that seemed to be a quick week, big Thank you to everyone who played along with our Easter challenge we had lots of entries this week.
Then he said, "When you looked at my picture, did you say, 'He's perfect?' " "Yes, Michael, we said that you were perfect for our family."
Although lately, as I mentioned above, he has been napping for only 2 hours. Yesterday he slept until 7:30 & it was glorious, but he was still ready for his nap by 10:30 (I was going to try to stretch him to 11:00 but that wasn't happening) & he woke at 12:30 so the day's schedule followed as usual.
Bheem (strong and brave)
Here are some shots from the game. Please note that I was holding a beer while taking these.
Shoulder to shoulder: 18 inches
Last night, I hung around with my two favorite teens, who came over to eat pizza and laugh hysterically and generally make my day better.
My first challenge was to sort through the garbage and get the facts straight. As a student, my budget was limited and I did not have the luxury of hiring a personal trainer or nutritionist—I was completely on my own. I researched everything from how to time my meals around my workout to what type of glue I should use to fix Swarovski crystals on my posing suit (btw, I found E-6000 to be really good! lol). I reached out to other competitors and personal trainers for training advice; I scoured through YouTube videos of various competitions to get a feel for what it would be like on stage; I attended a competition workshop (which I HIGHLY recommend, so much so that I now conduct my own workshops, you can message me on my Facebook Page for details) to get the inside scoop on what to expect the day of the show; I sampled competition diets I found online in blog posts and bodybuilding websites; I practiced posing and walking and took photos and videos of my progress; and I read dozens of reviews on tanning methods to determine how NOT to look like an Oompa Loompa.
The only fault I found in Eyes Like Leaves through the first two rounds was that the good-versus-evil conflict was lacking nuance. In the latest section, de Lint has addressed that by giving us a glimpse of the tension among the evil forces. They are not blindly following the Icelord, but rather bowing to his power at the moment, while some harbor long-term hopes of overthrowing him. I am interested to see how the dynamics on the bad guys' side play out, and I very much want to watch Carrie's continued development and her interactions with Tarn.
"I'm alone," realized she,
After seeking my children's opinion, I gladly went ahead to prepare this dish...Braised Pork Belly with Hard Boiled Eggs, 卤蛋红烧肉.
The theater was pretty nice — nothing fancy or special about it, actually. There weren’t any previews — or those “Silence is Golden” ads — and the movie started right away. To my relief, the movie wasn’t dubbed in Korean (because, well, let’s be real: there was maybe a 10% chance of it or something) but there were Korean subtitles at the bottom — a lot like those bootleg movie cams you can download. However, Korean movie etiquette is quite different here: a bunch of people were on their phones a lot during the movie, and one dude even had a phone call and didn’t hesitate to answer it and start his phone conversation. I was tempted to throw my empty food containers at him and cuss him out:
I'm facing this situation myself at the moment. I spent all last year querying a sci-fi with romantic elements, Atrophy. I got some great rejections, agents who said "I can't take this because it falls right between sci-fi and romance, so don't know what to do with it, but write something else and send me that!"
As the first day of senior year progressed, I found it amusing that we were in the first three classes together. By the end of the day, I wondered what sick-and-twisted master of the universe had done this to me? Here was the object of my desire dangled in front of me, sweet fruits tantalizingly out of my reach, and there she was in every class of the day. Since our class schedule was the same, our lunches also coincided. Fortunately, she didn't live near me, otherwise we would have ridden the same bus together.
I happened to be going home that day, and the girls in the house did not want the leftovers. Therefore, I took these chicken salad pockets to my family. They enjoyed them so much that we have been making them ever since.
Removing Clutter From Your Child’s Room
ERhh....no! But I'll do a helicopter land site on the rig instead.
The collection will be available on 4 October 2012 in 140 stores worldwide and online.
Shari Sloane's website, www.kidscount1234.com, has lots of calendar book pages that you can download free! But since the better clip art is usually copyrighted, she had to strip most of it off, so you may wish to add some of your own or eventually recreate your own papers with your own clip art. I personally started with her copies, and then gradually created my own as time went by. The ones that I have posted for you here today use only the artwork that I drew myself, so the copyright issue is not a problem for me.
-God has revealed Himself through both general and special revelation (general-to all people in all places at all times in nature, history, and human conscious and condition; special-to particular persons in particular places and times).
Ambroise Thomas’s Hamlet has riled and infuriated ever since its 1868 première, though for many it is merely an object of derision: one 1869 correspondent to the satirical magazine Punch admits not having seen the work but nevertheless disparages it as ‘Omelette’, a musical ‘burlesque’, and pillories Thomas’s fondness for drinking songs with the lines ‘To drink or not to drink? That is now the question / A glass of wine, I think, is good for the digestion’. Hamlet has however acquired its devotees, for whom the meaty title role and a more substantial part for Ophelia than in the play are too full of vocal highlights to ignore, and when the Metropolitan Opera staged the work in 2010 (the first time since 1897) the New York Times ran a spirited defence of Thomas, saying that mauling the Bard is nothing new and that the opera ‘generates its own theatrical
read it?
We talk doggy style and that's more than enough for me.
There were two staples in any of these freshman girls’ dorm rooms;
Tonight is the first night in the three months of unemployment that I haven’t been able to hold it together. This raises the question, “what do you do when you can’t just walk away?”
all that I have seen
A few months ago, Lisa from LVStyle contacted me to see if I’d be interested (!!! if I’d be interested, ha!) in blogging for the magazine’s new website. HECK YES. I decided to go with a “live local, day in the life, plus a recipe” format for content.
In the meantime, make a syrup by dissolving the sugar with the honey and the dark chocolate in a saucepan over medium heat. Bring to the boil, then reduce and keep simmering, without stirring for around 2 minutes. Do not leave the stove at this stage or you will end up with burnt caramel….don’t ask me how I know…
Yup, they are, in some cases.
It wasn’t even a covert breeze that came along, blustering away everything I KNEW to be true. It was a brazen and malevolent heist of joy that had just been sown in me at Bible study. I can recognize it for what it is in hindsight, but how better off I’d have been to have known it in the moment. I definitely would not have responded back with the same hatred that I was being impaled with.
WAITT: Who Am I Talking To?
Bobby (my husband) and I started laughing. Jay said "What? What's so funny?"
“Father” is a ballad song that touches upon the belated realization of the love and gratitude for one’s father. The delicate vocals in the track help envision the feelings of a father’s heavy footsteps and the view of his back. The song will be one that anyone can relate to with its dramatic lyrics about love and the emotional vocals of the members.
Reilly scratched his face in thought. He had managed to grab a few hours sleep in the officers lounge while waiting for the prints on Jacobs dead guy to come back. Jacobs hadn’t been lying. The guy had indeed paid a visit to the morgue. His prints came back as a one Mark Lindquist, 27 and his picture matched the one on file at the station. According to the report he had been found lying face down in his drive way dead. It had been another Coroner who had evaluated him on scene and had put down apparent drug OD as the possible cause. Neighbor statements substantiated that he was known to do drugs and that he had no next to kin. An autopsy had been pending.
Stranger's Child .Alan Hollinghurst
“It is good to have an end to journey towards; but it is the journey that matters in the end.” -Ursula K. LeGuin
I'm such an impatient reader, and really, not much happens at all for a good long while. Normally I'd be complaining right now about how I had to wait almost 200 pages before the action even kicks in and the hunt itself doesn't even start until after page 220. In a book that's only 293 pages long, normally I'd be pissed, or at least totally bored.
I just love this house and the barn. The crows and fence were just the perfect touch.
The following column is reprinted from the January issue of Providence Monthly (including the stuff my youthful editors somehow deem necessary to leave out):
I've really fallen off the outfit wagon, haven't I? I've been so obsessed with getting our house done that I can't think of anything other than paint, flooring and an occasional end table.
Back up access code: 469057191#
Unable to admit to any but his closest friends that it was his own work, when the dinner table conversation turned to the poem, and praise for its lively style filled his ears, it was almost enough to catch Rutland's eye and bask in the light of amusement and admiration that he saw there. Of course it bothered him that he couldn't admit to being its author, but already he knew that it was far better to have the freedom to write and publish than to take the credit and be told he was not to do it again. For no matter what he was told, he knew he would do it again.
This is one of their digis, isn't she just too cool? Actually, when I saw her, I thought she was a picture of me....hehehehe...but her name is Margaret. I printed her and colored her with water color crayons and an AquaBrush. Gotta LOVE the attitude!
The dry-suit dilemma:
Artist's travel roll with space for brushes /pencils / notepad /paints.
The disappearing 9-patch is pieced!
Matt 28:18-20: Jesus approached and spoke to them, saying: “All authority has been given me in heaven and on the earth. Go therefore and make disciples of people of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the holy spirit, teaching them to observe all the things I have commanded YOU. And, look! I am with YOU all the days until the conclusion of the system of things.”
Richard Baxter was a prominent English churchman of the 1600s. He was a peacemaker who sought unity among Protestants, and yet he was a highly independent thinker and at the center of every major controversy in England during his lifetime.
of his office whilst presiding on an
857 **D-V/16/1983. “Remembrance of Things Future: On Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar.” Shakespeare Lecture Series, The Cultural Center, Chicago Public Library, Chicago, Illinois. (Incorporated in Item C-2001(3), above, pp. 16-37.)
4 tablespoons sugar
I have yet in 80 posts on my "still adolescent blog" compared to some I follow,
1 sigh
It’s gonna be like a river beneath the streets that’s burst it’s banks.
Wow I havent posted on here since thanksgiving. :( Am so sorry. I have been off my a game since around that time. I have things ready to cut on my gypsy just need to get them cut out. Tomorrow is a new day and I really do hope to have some new things to post this coming week.
AFP – Brazil should suspend work on the massive Belo Monte dam project in the Amazon to consult the affected indigenous population, an intergovernmental human rights panel said Tuesday.
According to the BBC, Joerg Haider has been killed in a road "accident" and I believe them. Or rather I believe the bit about Haider being killed. Do I believe it was an accident? No.
"Over there in bridal registry, when I get to it, I will bring it to you."
What’s kickin’ readers?
Somewhere between vomiting on myself, and Shane blacking out again, Randy made his way up the stairs, purple latex gloves in hand. From the look on his round face, I could tell Shane was about to eat it. Shit was taking a turn for the worse.
“Here,” continues the first, “read this Bible, it is the inspired word of God! It tells the truth about his purpose for us and the laws by which we should live if we are to honour him. Praise Jesus!”
for the next few days until launch, we'll be teasing out bits here and there,
Part 1
Pete- a normal aged person; considered crazy by the whole population of the valley where he has been staying for times immemorial and so, he has been considered crazy since then. No one knew why it was so. Because one can’t see anything unusual in him- he was completely lucid and normal. There was only one trait of him that bugged people His reply to each and every agonized person that he met. And that reply was- BE silent and hug me.
Design Thoughts: It would be tough to thread the baker's twine through the fold in the card (not impossible, just tough), so I took a rectangle of kraft and wrapped it like the inspiration package and popped it up on a kraft card base. Instead of using an image on the oval as the packaging does, I added a sentiment, which allows me to give a distinct purpose and focus to the card.
You really want to consider the size of the forum as well. The bigger the forum, the less likely that you will find any *friends* there, also there will probably not be much real information. Under 100 members and there won't be a lot, either.(Under 50 members...why don't ya just meet in a chat room?)
5. How will a Mrs. Bissessar led UNC government deal with the economy due to the continued low prices for gas? What measure do you have for improving the utilization oil and gas revenues? Do you have any strategies for diversifying the economy?
9. Avocado, cheddar, cumin, and chipotle chili powder on corn tortilla
The so-called "secrecy bill" is centre stage in Parliament again this week, as various civil society groups, state organs and the media make oral submissions to the National Council of Provinces ad hoc committee on the draft legislation.
Kirby Cheep SquadKirby: Cheep Squad
Gangs, drugs and pimps have brought a cloud of fear and discouragement to this community on South Robinson, and The Salvation Army is reaching out to the citizens of that area, as well as those being prostituted, to offer hope, support, friendship and aid.
Are you a white shirt wearer? How do you style yours? I'd love to here your ideas and tips!
There’s just no unifying number range that I can give to y’all and say, “expect that much for your advance.”
I'm so tired of spending evenings making
Next was Linby, with a gorgeous Spring card - flowers, birdies and bugs featured largely - many punched out of such pretty paper. The result is a really fresh and uplifting card and I just love the edges - great stuff Linby! Often it's really funny to read the comments on snippets postings, which is why writing the roll call takes me so long. Mrs A offered to share her sandwiches with Linby if she revealed how the scalloped edges were done! I think it must have been agreed as Mrs A commented later that there were some jam sandwiches left in her lunch box for Linby! I also picked up somewhere that Lyn's dog ate Sarn's homework I think?!
One of the steps we've taken is to rid the space of the extra stuff that we don't want to frame around, like extraneous gas pipes and plumbing lines. Our space is pretty small, so we want to take advantage of all it.
Good Day Readers, come on in and welcome to a day in my life at the office…
Tuesday, I was bed-ridden. I left my room at 5:15pm to drag myself to Panera for soup along with the rest of my sick housemates (apparently Spring Weekend activities depressed all of our immune systems). Around 7pm I started to feel better and I was hopeful that one more solid night of nyquil sleep would do the trick.
fireflies under disco lights.."
Look at The genealogy of Jesus Christ; it is composed of people who failed God. Yet this is how Jesus came to be born: through this family who failed God. In this family of Jesus’ ancestors are found adulterers, murderers and liars, a prostitute, incest, etc..and God used them.
WHY WE DO IT
12-Eliminators - The Lonely Sea
You keep kowtowing, Obama, NATO, and U.S. military commanders. We’ll see how far that gets.
In most of the recipe books that are crammed precariously on our dark mahogany book-case there was next to no recipes in which butternut squash made a guest appearance; I guess it just isn’t traditionally something that Irish cooks like to dabble with.
Examiner)
Most people have consciences, I think. But some people's consciences seem to resemble swiss cheese inasmuch as they are very holey. I'm sure if someone "breached a contract" with this lawyer, she'd find it somewhere in her heart to feel that she had been wronged, not just financially, but morally. Unfortunately, recognizing the wrongs others do to us has nothing to do with conscience. Recognizing the wrongs we do to them does.
THIS ONE'S FOR MY BROTHER RICK: WED. 9/24 - DAVE GLEASON @ THE SWEET SPOT IN SANTA ROSA, 9pm. you know where it is...
Missed the turn to N.Hudson Elementary. Opps. Went down another street that runs perpendicular to the ball fields.
When they had killed those white men they made a mistake, because they took clothes, beads and cattle which they were forbidden to do by Mwari who had spoken through Kaguvi and Nehanda. They went to a store near Ruwa which was called Bally hooly. They took all the clothes. They went to another store which was at the present grove of gumtrees, at the junction of the Goromonzi, Salisbury, Umtali roads. They killed three European traders. They took everything in the store. They went to the European farmers and killed them. Another European had his hands cut off. They went through the mines killing the Europeans. They tried to kill the Native Commissioner but h
Strength: Western Kentucky hasn’t done a lot well this year, but one thing it has done is turn its opponents over. The Hilltoppers force close to 15 turnovers per game and do it with their quickness. The team doesn’t have a lot of size so has compensated by competing defensively to get as many possessions as possible.
The man is reported to be driving a white van.
There’s just something about authoritative, stern male characters that gets me all swoon’y. Maybe I have a daddy complex. Maybe I’m a 35 year old woman trapped in a 23 year old’s body.
Now, in my experience, any glitter will do but definitely big glitter works well here. I used a couple of layers of Model's Own Ibiza Mix and I think it works great! Clean up the edges using a cotton bud and some nail polish remover :)
Certainly not some low-level grunt, that’s for sure.
2 unwarranted
looks faithful, even demonstrates some
The tiara is named for the Cambridge side of Queen Mary's family, of which Princess Augusta was a part. She was married to the first Duke of Cambridge, a son of King George III. Her tiara was set on a base of pearls to match the hanging drop pearls that were suspended from diamond lover's knots. Queen Mary's design for the tiara did not have a base of pearls, but diamonds instead.
So let’s say you just can’t give up that glowing, just been to the beach look? There are many non-UV ways to appear tan. Jergen’s Natural Glow and others make your skin appear more tanned. You can also get an airbrush tan, it’s a temporary look that won’t leave you wrinkled.
June 17 – NO SHIMMYSHOWCASE -- Happy Fathers’ Day!
So, I think if all else fails, I will go get shipwrecked in the Caribbean. I prefer that to the cold Pacific. No northern oceans for me. I want the warm stuff, and I am afraid of everything in Asia so I may not go there to be marooned and lost.
Bain Capital at one point made investments in companies that specializes in green energy technology. Then voila, at some point, Mitt Romney declared himself a believe in Anthropogenic Global Climate Change. And of course, green energy. It does not take a rocket scientist-or a solar panel technician-to realize he was looking out for his own financial interests, and that of his company.
Forest City also tried to deflect the issue. It told NY 1, "We have already generated 50 percent of the projected economic activity for phase one. Were it not for the delays brought on by opponents of the project, including some of those behind this law suit, even more people would be employed right now.”
Every dog has its day, so they say, and it looks like Gnosticism, an ancient approach to spiritual experience, may be having its day, once again. Of course, despite the best efforts of the early Catholic Church, Gnosticism never really disappeared, but its reappearance over the centuries has been fleeting and sporadic. Why, as we march into a new millennium, is this hidden stream of quasi-Christian mysticism triggering a fresh interest among both spiritual seekers and readers of popular novels?
“These were the most intense super-cell thunderstorms that I think anybody who was out there forecasting has ever seen,” Greg Carbin of the SPC in Oklahoma told the AP.
And, yes, I have a long way to go folks!
Many of us today would conclude that the light on the hill is flickering, or faltering badly. What is it that causes this to be the case?
It was such a strong idea, I could see it so vividly, I had to do it even though I would be writing about a) the 16th Century and b) William Shakespeare, one of the most famous people ever. My rules had to go, but it was still a daunting prospect. How would I dare to do it? I had to get past my fear and find a way into him. First of all, I had to re-cast him in my head. I discarded all the portraits (disputed anyway) and decided that he would look like Joseph Fiennes in Shakespeare in Love (see above) a little older, maybe thinning a bit on top.
if you're in west london, there's a party coming to a place somewhere near you.
Heat olive oil in a large skillet and toss in the sliced red onions, cooking until soft. Add the thinly sliced garlic and crushed red pepper, stirring until fragrant but not browned. Stir in the diced winter squash and some fresh thyme; let it all cook for a few minutes over moderately high heat. Season well with sea salt and pepper. Then cover the skillet and cook over low heat, until the squash becomes tender, stirring occasionally to prevent sticking.
153. Riding my bike with my kids
Maybe even hate myself
The first time I walked into McSorley's Old Ale House and asked for a bottle of Bud was years ago and I was informed that they only sold their own ale. As a matter of fact, McSorley's has only sold it's own ale since it opened it's doors in 1854. As another matter of fact, the one big change that did take place required a decision from the Supreme Court, that being the admittance women. The feminist landmark decision forced the bar to finally install a female rest room by 1986, but other than that little has changed. Nothing has been removed from the walls since 1910, and souveniers from visitors past include handcuffs from Harry Houdini, a chair that Abraham Lincoln sat in when he visited in 1859, and wish bones left by soldiers during World War I. Those wishbones that remain are of soldiers who never returned to take them back.
I wasn’t planning on my last post for A to Z sounding so much like a mini literary analysis, but the book lends itself to discussion, academic or otherwise, and would be a great springboard for discussions with students about race and segregation in the U.S. post-Civil War.
Kazuo Ishiguro’s Remains of the Day
Roy Hodgson began his reign as England manager by discussing possible changes to his backroom staff with the Football Association and prioritising talks with Rio Ferdinand to establish whether the Manchester United defender would be willing to play alongside John Terry.
The books on obesity remain open. The latest entry: An obese man is 64 percent less likely to be arrested for a crime than a healthy man. Probably becuase an Obese man can run fast enough to get away!
(2) The owner of or person in control of a public place, or employer in respect of a workplace shall ensure no ashtrays are placed within any area where smoking is prohibited.
WRITERS’ STATEMENT
As it is, their body language is no different from that of cricket’s tri-colour smeared neo-literates who watch the game on giant screens at the stadiums.
Here are his qualities which made Teddy a winner when matched to the Selection Criteria.
sufficient water
To set up what you like against what you dislike
An enzyme that helps break down protein to digest it better. Foods that contain enzymes, such as papaya and pineapple, fresh fruits and vegetables provide an opportunity for the liver and pancreas to release more toxins.
Pop up their props on dimensionals.
Off I ran to their website and downloaded the software. You know I love playing with graphic design stuff...hence the 13 blog design changes and 129 1/2 buttons I have used here at Too Much Time. Of course I started this at 9 p.m. and it took a while to download to my computer. At 10:04 last night I started playing and this darn thing kept me up till midnight. There are SOOOO many papers, embellishments, tags, designs, and colors I couldn't stop myself.
Fascist flag of Italy…
As a small business owner, I don't have to issue a lot of people 1099s. Two to three dozen a year. It's not complicated, really, though it has often been annoying, since the forms are expensive, not always easy to find in stock, and you have to mess around with the alignment to get them to print right. So I was pretty excited by the idea of eFiling the 1099s and then being able to print them on plain paper. At $39, it seemed reasonable. At the "early bird" pricing of $25.00, it seemed very reasonable. Though, to be honest, you do still have to mail them. So you have to buy envelopes especially for 1099 forms. The motivator for me is that this year I have to mail exactly 25 of them and the forms are sold in batches of 25. If I mess one up or have to reprint at all, I'm going to need another batch. But if I pay for this eFile service, I can print them as needed on plain paper. So that's a bit of insurance for me, I guess.
Every couple of months, I take my adult daughter, and we join the local Free Thinkers group for a Sunday brunch. At the most recent meeting there was a newcomer male, apparently thrilled to escape religious pressure to blindly believe in things that he THOUGHT were wrong, or at least unprovable. He showed the same type of assumptions and non-thinking that he was trying to escape. He kept asking different people, “How long have you been an atheist?”, as if thinking, and believing in a higher being were mutually exclusive.
Stamp- Sweet Gothic Kids "Pumpkin Judy"
For eyes, I listen to my own instincts, rather than go looking for color advice at the makeup counters. Reigning wisdom is to choose colors that complement your eye color, rather than choose the same color. Well, I prefer my eye color and take it from there. My eyes are a combination of gold, green, sea green, and blue. I call it "hazel" but it's more than that, and even MP thought my eyes were blue until we were dating for a while. Since the color impression of my eyes shifts with what I wear, I find green eyeshadow a great way to highlight that part.
That being said, the GOSA report is true and factual. And quite powerful. The truth is that we knew there was very damning evidence and that the statistics were sound, even if this particular type of erasure analysis is a relatively blunt instrument. When the report was initially presented, it was obvious that GOSA had not thought through providing district’s guidance or standards for investigation. It stands to reason, as well, that they were so pleased with themselves that they had identified this black-eye for APS (and for Dougherty County/Albany) schools, that they hadn’t thought about what doing an investigation into 58 schools would really take.
It continued to snow our first night there and when we woke up the next morning, there was a fresh blanket of snow covering the trees & deck:
The much-maligned greengrocer's apostrophe actually has a valid claim to existence in some cases. Researching Renaissance maps for a historical novel, I came across some that marked dangers to look out for - of the 'hereby monsters' variety, but more plausible. Around the Caribbean, the sailor was to look out for Tornado's. There were no other misplaced apostrophes. Do greengrocers sell Tornado's? I think not.
In explanation of what husband as prophet is to do for his wife, Lepine says,
Make sure to check out the SSD blog for the rest of the team and our guests’ cards!
Hi everybody, what a beautiful day - I hope the sun is shining wherever you are. I'd like to say hello and welcome to my new followers and to say hello to the followers that have been with me for awhile, I really do appreciate you wanting to follow me.
We were asked and we thought it would be impolite to say no. We did not expect to get any further than being booed off the first night. We wrote "Hvar ertu nú?" in 10 minutes and ended up with a pretty good song if we say so ourselves. We really enjoyed going through the whole circus. The audience was new to us and we had an opportunity to try out live gimmicks on a bigger scale than usually. We also made a lot of good connections in Hafnarfjörður and Eastern Europe which will come in handy some day.
Today (yesterday, Monday. What day is it?) I just clocked up over 5,000 words! That's the most I've written in a day. By the way, today (I mean yesterday) was my day off. That helped. But still.
And if you were even slightly prepared for this stage, knowing that the pulling and stretching was coming, you forgot that you too were part of the dance. That the relationship was going to be stretched by both of you.
Matt's already left for work, it's crazy how early he has to get up and get going. I had breakfast with him, oatmeal with flax seed and fresh blueberries and a cup of almond milk. I am trying to get whole grains and a serving of fruits and/or veggies with all 3 meals. Then have fruit and a protein bar for one snack and something with fat, like avocado, cottage cheese, yogurt or spinach and artichoke dip with carrot sticks or zucchini, for another snack.
Schönen Samstag Euch allen! Es ist wieder Zeit für eine neue Ausgabe des Stempeleinmaleins. Januar ist ja bekanntlich Schnupfen-Zeit. Und wenn man dann schon immer Naseputzen muss dann doch bitte zumindest Taschentücher aus einer schönen Box verwenden! Und darum gibt es diesmal eine Anleitung für ein Tissue-Box-Cover.
My Mums Craft Shop started in late 2010 but since the start of 2011 we have expanded the company and now have thousands of products in stock and online. We specialise in rubber stamping products for cardmakers and scrapbookers. We have hundreds of different stamps available from various worldwide stamp companies including - CC Designs, La La Land Crafts, My Favorite Things, Stampavie, Whimsy Stamps, Whiff Of Joy to name but a few. We add new products on a daily basis to our ever expanding ranges - check out our blog for the latest info.
(according to the photos and the little symbol next to the recipe, this drink is served in a cocktail glass)
He found her annual and the resentment turned to rage in an instant. A cheerleader and immensely popular in high school, Minerva’s annual had dozens of signings and best wishes, all from the most popular kids. Wayne didn’t even bother with an annual, he couldn't wait to be out of high school and away from those that tormented him for three straight years.
I do know I learned more from listening to this teacher on the way to lunch than I have from reading many educational blogs this past year. As well, I came away aching to continue learning from her; oh, I wish she shared digitally about her teaching and learning.
Josh Out
Thanks Ruedi (I did pay you for them, didn't I?)!
Apple and several major book publishers, including HarperCollins, Penguin Group USA and Simon & Schuster are being sued over e-book pricing, accused of conspiring to raise e-book prices to monopolize the market. The story, dominating the headlines on all the major online news outlets this morning, is not surprising in any way.
I don't feel bad in the slightest that this loser is gone, but I do feel bad for his two innocent victims, one of whom was still a teen. And of course he has to make us gun folk look bad on his way off the planet. Good riddance to him, I say.
All the things you needed are already in it. The big butterfly and the doily are dies from Marianne Design.
One thing I always imagined until they proved me wrong was that it was impossible not to make money by running a bank. I am full of s**t, as you know from reading this blog - but so are they, it seems. See http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-2106237/Loo-view-The-dizzying-heights-bankers-ivory-tower-toilet.html.
Transform, beating down craters and sand
Do you ever find that you have a hard time being honest in your blogging?
THE MITM WENT OFF ON MR CTA!!!!!
I will try to keep up on my blog. I know that I'm terrible with it, but I'll try.
Well, apart from my shameful lack of self-promotion over the last few days, anyway. I'm not actually being as petulant as that sounds, either. What I mean is, what would convince YOU to buy my book? I've sold 2 copies in the 17 days the book's been on sale, and I can't help thinking that even a brand new starting author should have managed a bit better than that.
will require a patent).
Two provinces down,the third,the biggest in terms of land mass and smallest in terms of population has fingers crossed for balkanization of the region. The level of intrigue and mystique surrounding the third province is interminable. News of bounty being announced for the death of Punjabis straying in Balochistan filters out now and then and people are gripped with fear. The media and other political parties,with PTI at the fore of it have endless capacity and breath to waste on spewing criticism at the government and every preceding government in the past,reinforcing the point that balkanization might indeed be the best solution. Give the Sardars their barren play ground. A province where every provincial assembly member is given an amount set in millions for development in their constituency,but still posts an abysmal income per capita of USD 183 (PKR- 16287) per year cannot blame the federal government for the insurgency and having an ‘apathetic’ attitude towards the province. Not when the Sardars are known for smuggling weaponry worth millions from across the border and run a thriving black market with the parliament’s blessings.
My family arrived and I kept bouncing while we talked.
The left eye is mapped to the left side of the body and the right eye to the right side. The top of the eye is mapped to the upper body (e.g., brain, face, neck, chest and heart).
We just finished the 2nd day of a 3 day workshop and I have a mess of applique to do tonight for our final day. I hate not having a finished project at the end of a workshop so you know I will be up late tonight doing all I can.
Why don’t most people trust themselves and listen to their own counsel?
I have it as the wallpaper on my laptop
See some of the pictures below
I find it ironic that there are a number of Sir Ray Tindle scholarships and bursaries available for students to study journalism at the University of Buckingham whilst staffing levels and conditions have been drastically reduced for working journalists locally.
We signed the boy up without consulting him, because I'm not sure he knows what soccer is by definition. He loves to play soccer with his brothers in the yard, and he loves watching the kids on the AYSO field play games as we drive by, so we took that as some sort of enthusiasm for the sport.
I AM WHO GOD SAYS I AM. I CAN DO WHAT GOD SAYS I CAN DO!
will create about 82 layers of butter and dough. Wrap with parchment paper and chill it in refrigerator for about 2 hours. If you want you can chill for overnight too. I did with my second half of dough.
Of most of the images I do not know the source. Sorry for that.
4. The military will be nationalized.
It was at this point that I put the cooled pecans, on the cookie sheet, into a 350 degree oven for 10-12 minutes – check them at 10 minutes so that you don’t overcook them, like I did.
I suspect that these phantom voters are rather like Robert Rams imaginary library. But I will say this. If you are planning to vote Tory and have never voted Tory before, because you are upset with the criticism of Brian Coleman, I'd love to interview you. Please get in touch
Only because I do not like to summarize.
Tina Fey? You know I love you. The restraining order says so. But I'm finishing up Bossypants and I have to say, boo for your blip about the time you were fat. And you were a ginormous SIZE 12. Oh Tina. All that talk about woman power and it still comes down to the numbers? I will always worship the ground you walk on, but I'm a little more self-conscious now.
This recipe is super duper easy and from the fine folks at King Arthur Flour. You can throw the ingredients together in the morning and bake them while you are taking a shower. The muffin has Dutch-process cocoa and some chocolate chips for a double chocolate punch.
As it happens, I was on the train when I finished the book. It was a beautiful ending to a beautiful book. I didn't care that the train was crowded, and I was sitting in a seat directly facing strangers. I smiled to myself, closed the book slowly, and then reopened it to the first page, where my mother had written her name 18 years earlier. I ran my index finger across her name and sighed.
Before it get more serious I need help / tips to keep me away from the malls & unnecessary no pun intended retails.
But what is the US view of the world as it is? Clinton gave a clue to the US’s understanding of the global pecking order, and South Africa’s policy makers should have no illusions about where South Africa fits in.
Intermediality and Contemporary Cultural Production in Spain
And longs for the rest of Death.
1. Save Your Good Lovin' For Me
Advertising.
… The most worthy calling in life is that in which man can serve best his fellow man. … The noblest aim in life is to strive to live to make other lives better and happier. ― David O. McKay
Well this week saw my bi - monthly class again (held every other Monday) and we made some lovely cards. They were a Star Card and a Pyramid card. I have seen them a few times on the internet and not sure where I saw them first.
and jade intermingling,
If you think all this sounds Hellish, you’re dead right. If you think this doesn’t sound fun… you might be right. Certainly there’s a lot here that’s interesting, but you might be doubtful as to whether it makes a good game.
Veterinarians hate to give pet owners bad news. People today have a greater emotional attachment to their pets than in the past, and dogs and cats have moved from the farm and the backyard to being house pets. Not only do our four-legged companions sleep in the bedroom, many sleep in our beds.
Wow. Exercising discipline in portion control is hard enough for myself. What about with this child who says over and over again, "Want toast?" Everything in me wants to reward his "using his words" by giving him food. Everything in me wants to make sure that he will thrive. Everything in me wants to love him by giving him food. But I know that food is actually not love. Love is love.
While I am at the 2012 AWDF Championship and Team Challenge, I plan to experiment with different metering modes and see if it makes a difference. In his book, Mitchell recommends that less experienced photographers stay with evaluative mode, and I agree. Even the pros, such as Mitchell, find the evaluative mode, which is the default mode for most DSLRs, works very well. But I am curious, so check back to see the results of this experiment. If you have any experience with using different metering modes in Schutzhund or other types of photography, I would love to hear from you.
The toilet I was sitting on decided at that moment that it was time to flush with a great big WHOOOOSH!
Bonnie and her husband Bob live in a log cabin on 15 acres in upstate area of Binghamton, New York with a dog and cat who consider the humans as wait-staff.
Amy and Roger's Epic Detour is an amazing road trip. Really. They take turns picking destinations, and make all kinds of discoveries along the way: discoveries about America, and about themselves. From the Loneliest Road in America to the deliciousness of Chick-fil-A, Amy and Roger are taking each mile of the trip as it comes, never knowing what awaits them. As Amy gradually adjusts to being around people again, she starts realizing that things can't stay bottled inside forever. She and Roger make a true connection, and he helps her gently but steadily break down the walls she put up and deal with the raw emotion she's kept hidden so long. This isn't all Amy's story however, and Roger learns to see past his own mistakes and look more clearly at life. In finding the best eats and chasing down windmills (a`la Don Quixote), Amy and Roger's epic detour becomes a literal journey to new life.
Speaking of which, Michael Biehn brings his great, natural humanity to Corporal Hicks. He shows the character to be a natural leader with confidence, decisiveness, and intelligence. Hicks is definitely the guy that will have your back all the way. Just as he was in The Terminator, Biehn shines through as a wonderfully dynamic and emotionally powerful actor. His warmth and chemistry with Sigourney strikes the right, soft chord. They work extremely well together with a mutual respect that penetrates through the screen. I’m not sure that the original casting choice of James Remar would’ve embodied those qualities so strongly or naturally. Michael Biehn was an amazing, fortunate happenstance in this instance.
One of the attacks took place just hours after Taylor, who had no previous convictions, returned home from a Newcastle Borough Council meeting.
I hope this helps.
With this in mind, I’m going to do something a little bit different with you today. I’m going to give you a little break from thinking you’re a horrible mess, by allowing you to see what a horrible mess really looks like. You have all been working so hard up to this point; bearing your souls, naked before God and confessing your sins so that we might pray for one another and be healed of our sickness: the desire to rule over our husbands.
On this question, as with some others, I had to ask if there was a third option, a mixed opinion. The questions seemed designed to create stark opposition.
to lacerate the back of men who staggered to their graves.
“But, Dele, he is just a child” my mother would say
(me on Christmas getting my Cricut)
Are you happy?
Fated and powdery;
2. Save the Dates – have them printed, addressed (myself) and sent off to wedding guests before this month is over! B- Ok, so I’ve only seen Save the Dates as a PDF, BUT I was at the mercy of couple other people’s time that are just giving me their free time. I had all my parts done (how I wanted them to look a.k.a. my own design and samples of my handwriting) and hopefully I will have them very, very soon! I can’t wait for people to see them!!!
Reduce the heat to medium low and simmer for 10 minutes.
Sturluson S (Translated by Faulkes A, 2000) Edda, Everyman, London.
II Cor. 3:17 Now the Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is freedom.
Baby you don’t know me, cause you’re dead wrong
Having grown Tom Thumb (orange) and Milkmaid (creamy white) nasturtiums last year (some of which are already creeping back again), I was very taken with the variety in the photo above called Blue Pepe; the colour combo of blue/purple/green leaves is a favourite and will be jazzed up with bright red flowers in due course. When I can, I love to grow veg that are one step removed from what's expected and these will do nicely! Entirely edible, too - I'm planning some fabulously stylish salads this year!
So, without further ado…
He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavoured to bring on the inhabitants of our frontiers, the merciless Indian Savages, whose known rule of warfare, is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and conditions.In every stage of these Oppressions We have Petitioned for Redress in the most humble terms: Our repeated Petitions have been answered only by repeated injury. A Prince whose character is thus marked by every act which may define a Tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.
It so happens that I do. Barry is sitting opposite me and, bless him, has started shifting uncomfortably in his seat. Barry is the very definition of a decent skin and is happily settled with a lovely young lady, so I really don't have an issue with my wife having kissed him on a night out many moons before we even met. We don't talk about exes much but she had told me about Barry, perhaps to help me avoid an awkward situation such as the one Kevin has just tried to engineer.
Or begin your run
It's Joycelyn here, your November hostess, and this week we're doing a challenge that I've done a few times in the past, but it is definitely one of my faves!
TJ Demos (University College London)
His is a view shared by the prime minister and other BN figures, and naturally echoed throughout the state media where Najib was widely quoted as describing the rally to be an attempt to topple the government.
Date Started: May 1, 2012. 1:00 AM. Book #23 of 2012.
Break of day
Yesterday evening, I sat for a while, watching Nathan's fingers dart quickly over the keyboard of my laptop as he wrote another of the pieces that keep us returning again and again to his blog. I sat for a while playing scrabble with Kelly, watching her cleverly crafting interlocking words from the most basic of letters. And as I did, I thought of another ritual that had once felt so comforting then somehow turned into a chore.
I pray for others with transcendent faith.
5 caused
We do many things that are motivated by fear, some that we are not ever aware of. If we fear anything but God, that motivation is sin and leads us away from God and into more to sin. The greater our sin, the greater our fear of his judgement.
We then mooched around the tiny streets, browsing through piles of books and resisting the urge to buy everything in the multitude of vintage stores that have popped up in the last couple of years.
world an incredible gift
THE SHAMROCK TSUNAMI
As an ex-bullied person, the worst thing you can do is shut yourself away. Staying at home and avoiding people allows your fears to go unchallenged and for your confidence to stay low. How do you know whether people out there are good and friendly if you don’t go out and give them a chance? Even going for a walk on your own can lighten your mood and help you feel more in touch with the outside world. Get in touch with friends, go out for a meal or to the cinema. Interacting with people will build your confidence and take your mind off your worries. It will also give you a more healthy and balanced outlook on the world: it’s not as scary as you might think and there’s a lot of good things to get involved in.
I can find no current info. online about the situation, but this is probably another building that will be lost to time, to circumstance, and from what I've read, perhaps a little bit of greed on the part of the property owner. He would rather tear the barn down than to simply give it to the town.
Additionally, you'll find if you look deeply, the topics I'm researching. Most of them are just fine but what about the links and information I'm putting in my next book? I've worked hard for what is in my head, do I want you to be able to see everything there before it is published in my next book? Would it put me in breach of my publishing contract? I'm not totally sure (but then again, I'm not totally unsure either it is enough of a question to bother me, however.)
you walk through the muted background
Like many gorgeous women, L is compelled to find an aspect of her looks to be hyper-critical about, and she has chosen one crooked canine to worry over; it’s a bit out of line, and it tends to make her smile slightly uneven, irreverent, cocky. But scrutinizing her smile in the mirror, she wailed, “Where were my parents? Where was my retainer?”
Before taking my mother-in-law (“suegra” in Spanish) and the rest of our family to the seashore mall known as Larcomar, having a wonderful buffet full of ceviche, pulpo (which would be octopus), and other assorted Peruvian cuisine at Mangos, and before snapping the picture that was featured here, we took the whole family unit to Inka Market so that mi suegra could browse for, shop for, and buy all manner of Peruvian crafts including scarves, jewelry, and gloves.
6) People leave their barky dogs outside longer, and more often. This means less sleep for me.
‘So you come here to soak up some life before you head back to the quiet of nature?’
8 seemed
The post-World War II California economy was dominated by large private companies in aerospace, heavy manufacturing, finance, insurance, telecommunications, and rapidly expanding public sector entities—the U.S. Postal Service, the state employment/unemployment offices, the local governments, and school systems. Once hired into these private or public entities, in the absence of misconduct, a worker could expect long-term employment.
What do you think?? Now, don't forget that you have to copy and paste the linky thing at the bottom of your Technique Challenge project. It is very easy. Just go to the Blockheads web page Tutorial and copy the HTML and paste it onto the bottom of your post. There are prizes and lots of fun. If you are a big Facebook person, you can enter on the Blockheads' Facebook page too. There is an additional prize over on Facebook. So have fun and let's see your creation!!
“I didn’t say that. You two can be by-standers.”
“We had to leave our apartment straight away because of the smoke. I’m pregnant and I don’t want to take any risks. Hopefully everything will be okay,” Karin Kristina Sandberg, resident of Laekjargata 4, told Fréttabladid.
Why do you work with all these oldschool equipment? I read about discussions about the right bass machine, synthesizers and so on. I was especially fascinated by the super 8 videos… Is there a specific idea to it?
1 8 oz package tempeh, crumbled fine
But if there was something that really, really bugged me on Saturday night, and still does, it was the manner in which the Indian team went about defending the target of 296.
That's the way my kids are, for definite sure.
The problem is we're very removed from Jeremy. There's no sense of connection; of what he's like.
In the dreary cold before spring,
Changes to an already approved and published book (where the problem was not caused by UKUnpublished) will require an additional charge, however, this will simply represent the cost and time involved, and you will always be notified prior to any charges being accrued - although this is a very rare occurrence.
Marko Hamlin’s story encourages me to continue writing, and speaking about child sexual abuse prevention and awareness. It ministers to me, that we can put a gap between the current statistics and lower the number of men and women who have these haunting stories of child sexual abuse.
Sebastian too hides his cautious fears. Will they find a place for him on the team? Will he be teased, humiliated. He wants to be accepted. He wants to go home for Thanksgiving, a hero, a complete man, accepted and comfortable in his surroundings. He wants to assuage his mother's anxiousness by regaling stories of acceptance. He wants that pin on his lapel and a bunch of mates to wolf-whistle with. He wants one of those cheerleaders. Particularly the beautiful Cindy Cowan. Every time he sees her walk into the cafeteria she's flanked by admirers, cool and reserved but with a confidence that makes her shine. He hears music that isn't there, and feels the breeze brush through her blonde hair. He imagines her naked, firm, nubile and receptive. His imaginings get away from him so quickly he's often missed class choosing to remain seated rather than expose the erection he's developed obeying his fantasies. Yep, he'll pledge. Maybe then she'll look twice.
I'm so thankful we have the choice though. I really don't approve when people say we have far too much choice these days. The alternative sucks far so much more.
I am soo looking forward to Saturday! There is SO much going on this weekend so if you don't have plans to meet friends to crop on National Scrapbook Day I've got some ideas that you can have fun doing right at home!
My family attended a game once where Mario Soto relieved Bruce Berenyi in the first inning. Soto then went on to pitch a gem. I don't remember all of the details - and I should go do some research - but I do know that years later I was chatting with a co-worker while living in Ohio and I discovered he had attended the same game with his family.
Another friend my age, a woman who is also a writer, devotes many hours every week cooking and caring for her in-laws. Her two sons, looking for work, are back at home.
Who are the essential people who need to know
It was also really exciting fun to watch couples walk down the astro-turf sloping ramp, joyful with keys in hand. This couple met in NYC but refused to tell me where they met....hmmm, one can only imagine the delightful story shared by two secret NY lovers, or, at least, NY lovers of secretes...
And I need to know, where’s all the love for black girls?
“The guy I was sitting beside, he had the initiative to grab his camera out, but he was shaking so much he had some trouble taking pictures so I did it.”
In some ways, Chua and the Tiger mothers are taking the easy route. They have picked their goal and are pursuing it with a single-minded fury that allows for no hesitation, no questions, no uncertainty, no doubts. Even as Ava and I rightly decide to go the other way, to value our time as a family over the pulls of the childhood industrial complex, to send our children to whatever university Ava is currently working at, there will always be in my mind the tiny ‘what if,’ the bit of curiosity about whether Polly or Pip could have set the world on fire had they been given the chance.
Carol Ast - Breast Cancer Art These paintings are not for sale, but they show her reflections on dealing with cancer. Take a look and remember those who have suffered.
But don't take my word for it. Go to Kindleboards.com and look at all the self-pubbed authors selling like crazy. Go to Amazon.com and look at the bestseller lists, which are full of indie authors (who are competing with huge bestselling authors, and in many cases making more money than those bestsellers.) Crunch the numbers yourself, and try to find a scenario where you'd actually do better in the long term by signing with the Big 6.
Working Title: Reef Stew
Briefly analyzing all these factors, one comes to the inevitable conclusion: why on earth are you not dragging Chinese shoppers over to Japan in droves? Give them their tacky bottle of baijiu at a place with a table, let them pour it themselves and just keep someone on staff to make sure there’s enough bottles around. Whiskey works too. Why are there more sales people than Chinese tourists at Armani Ginza in rush hour? Take a leaf from Taiwan and buss them around like lined up duckings in perpetual pursuit of stupid sign if you have to!
This next card was the continuation of my brief love affair with Popcorn (don't worry, it's not over - he will be back) and is a stamped and coloured Popcorn done in a tunnel card - again he's coloured with my speccies, the paper on the outside is from the matching Popcorn Kids CD, but the paper inside the tunnel is again from that freebie pad from a recent magazine. I've also used a sentiment from the CD and I've used some Dew Drops for accents.
4) Standing in the direct sunlight with a 100 billion percent humidity is not conducive to watching a boat race.
4 rapid
Location: Wichita, KS
The frenetic strings are what stick in the mind in this track, with the whole cue setting the scene for a rip-roaring movie. Unfortunately, from what I recall, the film doesn’t really live up to the exuberance of the track.
Interestingly alongside the usual pouring to avoid sediment advice it advises you to 'not refrigerate for longer than 30 minutes as a chill haze may result'.
I discussed my findings later with a friend and pointed out that it was good to see the variety of uses, and that I felt pointing to websites was not very original. My friend pointed out that it was easier than keying word/backslash/word/backslash, etc. Good point.
“Water under the bridge, Keith,” Mommy cooed, drowning his potatoes in gravy. Sarah got a similar portion, behind their guest’s back Mommy jabbed a finger at it and mouthed ‘eat’ and Sarah picked up her fork. Amy ate—that is, she shoveled up food and put it in her mouth. Mommy put very little on her plate, she spent most of dinner watching over people’s plates, pouncing on any opening she perceived in their portions.
The first card was, in fact, the "winner" card. It is made of flimsy card stock. You can see the front below. The back has some small copyright text and a QR code (you'll see one later in this post). The next card was "Diamond," who turned out to be the only female in the pack. She was born the year after I graduated high school. Man, I'm getting old.
www.risingtidebrewing.com
Oh, that air.
Time Out: Talk of the Town
even though I’ve heard
41. 1920’s Shipwrecked Among Cannibals was the first film to gross $1,000,000 for Universal.
I don’t remember the last time a book moved me to tears the way The Fault In Our Stars did. I had to actually stop reading a few times as I couldn’t see through the tears. It could be because the story hit a bit close to home for me. But it also had everything to do with the fact that Green wrote the characters in such a way, that I felt like I knew them, that Hazel and Augustus were my friends and I cared what happened to them. I connected with them.
And there it was.
so far, i haven't let her try in this pregnancy.
INSIDE A CHURCH
If you do it as a blog post, please send me a link, and afterwards I'll do a round-up of who said what. Or if you prefer, just leave a comment below.
Both in the construction design of the mechanical units as well as in the concept of the electrical and electronic control functions, a high value has been placed on the greatest number of possible variations. For this reason the composition of the projector is very easily adapted to meet specific customer requirements. The projector housing has adjustable pedestals giving a variable projection angle of ±10 degrees. The projector will be delivered completely wired and factory-tested, pad shoes ensure a reliable and precise film transport and guidance. A curved film gate ensures a sharply defined picture, even when buckled film is being run.
* Heat the oil, fry cumin seed until fragrant, add in onion, green chili and ginger, cook until light brown.
I think, I am also lucky because my parents have not been traditional Malays, especially my mother who raised me. There was of course some talk of Malay superstition, “don’t sing in the kitchen or you’ll get an old husband” sort of stuff. Of course, I was always singing in the kitchen, and as of yet, have never had a relationship with anyone older than me. Maybe they meant I would get married when I was old, and therefore have an old husband? Mixed with that, there were Western superstitions. My mother would actually turn around if a black cat passed in front of her. This went on until I got my cat Zorro who was really probably the devil incarnate, but after he walked past my mother a few times a day and no evil luck befell her, she gave up that particular superstition. It was an interesting way to grow up, at the very least.
Cold and uncaring.
Tel: 0861 462 496
1 quart crushed tomatoes
Tax Implications
It was run by two artists who run craft events under the title Bunty and Bella (after their grannies). Their workshops are fun and a twist on traditional crafts. I had attended an excellent bookmaking workshop with them earlier in the year.
I think not!
Ok, so I get it, the reasoning. It actually makes sense. Whenever someone has been victimized they need to find someone or something to blame, to hate in order to find a way to cope. I have to do some more research into the whole “forgotten 3 year war” before I make too many claims on the specific subject, but from what I can tell, the US pretty much went in there and slaughtered the nation in fairly horrific ways. It is not unrealistic that in trying to pick up the (literal) pieces of their country and their lives they needed to blame, point fingers, and even hate until the healing is done.
But even better: I got a big shock 5 years ago when I picked up a book - 500 ways to change the world - at a stall at the Word on the Street festival in Toronto. I was in town to facilitate the YWALK youth forum and I bought the book knowing that it could be useful in some way.
Nesbit was followed by Pat Dennis (also known as “the long-suffering Pat Dennis”), who had been an assistant for Dick Tarrant at Richmond. Dennis would last for fourteen years, the longest tenure of any of The Citadel’s basketball coaches. His sixth squad finished 15-13, the first winning season at The Citadel in a decade, and actually won a SoCon tourney game, the first in 13 years for the school. After a few more losing years, Dennis would have consecutive winning seasons in 2001-02 and 2002-03, one of only two times The Citadel has had consecutive winning seasons in the last 42 years. The perpetually frustrated Dennis would lose 20+ games in three of his final four seasons, however. Dennis finished with a career record at The Citadel of 156-235.
Wei sighed in anticipated relief as his troops set out in the direction of what he hoped would be dry ground.
But Anyway going back to people… I believe that people are all the same in some ways. Men, women, girls, boys. We are all the same.Age doesn’t matter because we are all the same. The maturity of us have gone through similar things and delt with similar problems. I think that is why I hang out with people that vary in age. My one friend Ruti is 25, and I hang out with her just like I would hang out with any other person. I think that age doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter when you really love someone and they are apparently “too old” for you or just have a close bond. My mother always says, “once you turn 21 it all doesn’t matter. I don’t understand that because what if people don’t drink when they turn 21? they are the same people they were when they were 20. It doesn’t matter to me about age. When I have children, (if I do) I won’t mind that my son or daughter is hanging out with older people. As long as they are happy, that is all that should matter. I believe that if you hang out with older people you are less likely to get into any trouble. When I was hanging out with younger kids I felt like I was at greater risk because I was the oldest and they wouldn’t get in trouble and i would.
Oh man.. this weekend was super fun and my liver is throbbing asking me to please spare it for a few days. I have a blogger dinner on Wednesday where you apparently get an entree and 3 glasses of wine for super cheap soooooo yeah. Sorry little guy.
Then release it and move forward. Sometimes things can’t be healed until you release the challenges in your lives, so that then the healing rays can enter. Stop focusing upon “what went wrong” and instead focus on ‘what you did that was right.’ It is okay to trust that you are on the right path and then decide that it isn’t working for you and make a course adjustment. Everyone and everything is put on your path for a purpose, even if you can’t see that at this moment.
* We have decided to become foster parents... for a boxer puppy. We love the breed dearly and would like to help out in some way. We're not quite ready to adopt another dog after losing our precious Charlie, but think it would be great to help out a sweet pup until they can find their forever home!
Oh, well, I have plenty of time to experiment! I’m excited and I’m pumped….then again, that could be the caffeine talking!
And, by teaching “numbers” in this abstract way, she suddenly is getting it. She also saw letters in a sign and pointed out the ones she knew. Interesting, by “not” teaching her letters and numbers directly, she seems to be grasping their concepts easier. And, learning them in association with other actions makes them less boring and more fun.
(if you want something lighter, why not try a new "reality" show on itv - "the only way is essex". the definition of a guilty pleasure, but sometimes after a day of working, studying and lectures I'm so brain dead I can't digest anything else ;) anyone else watching this?...)
Populate design and accoutrement is not the only shipway to develop a home, still. More homeowners are choosing to add additions to their homes to harmonies relatives or borders in addition to supererogatory apartment, such as washing apartment off of the kitchen or recreation flat the entire kin can like. Environmentally palely features are also hot that amend to lighten the home, preclude money and alter the surround. Solar decorated windows and life economical doors can real help to separate a home and tidy it expenditure powerful.
In case you wish to know:
I'm guessing that millions of pounds of tax payer's money has been spent on producing leaflets, signs, notices, and public literature, to ensure it is written in a variety of different languages with larger print alternatives for those with sight difficulties.
08) An Ode To No One
Filling the bird feeder on the back deck:
"Personally, given the ubiquity and propensity of life to flourish wherever it can, I would say, my own personal feeling is that the chances of life on this planet are 100 per cent," Mr Vogt said. "I have almost no doubt about it."
So, we've had 3 nights of frost this week (see the frost on the car), and most of next week has that potential. According to the farmers, sweet cherry blossoms are fatally damaged at 25 degrees, and apples and sour cherries at 24 degrees. We got below that last night. Serviceberries are wild. I have no idea what temperatures they can survive.
Since his great success he has decided to spread ‘The Word’ in churches around the country. He recently spent time in a Las Vegas church talking about football, the Tebowing craze and his faith. It was a packed house with over 4,000 people in attendance.
make grilled cheese,
Well, it's getting towards the end of the programme now, so better bite the bullet and have a bit of a film of the serious novel's author talking intelligently about it (though sweeten the pill with some lurid spooky photography).
chauffeur
Green pencil skirt, Zara €49.95
Not until relatively recently, it was a requirement that this day was kept with two conventual Masses where choral obligation existed. The first, post tertiam, was the festive Mass of St. Mark the Evangelist. The second post nonam was the more penitential Mass formula of Rogation tide. For those bound to the Divine Office, the Litany was mandatory today.
1 Garlic clove, peeled and minced
It’s the second week of the Challenge and Captain Savage is on holiday losing karma points by the minute (just for having a good time, SURELY that must be sinful) so I’m using the opportunity to stack up as many points as I can (but as they can only really be awarded by CS that’s, well, a bit pointless really)!
At the Oklahoma City Winter Quilt Show, I was asked about the Beautiful Belle Handbag Pattern. She was looking to make a gym bag and was hoping I could give her some insight as to whether it would work well. Of course, I hadn't made it yet but I promised her that I would and review the pattern right here. Here goes!
Blue skirt: Anthropologie
Isn't it pretty though? A little chocolate flower with gooey-raw-peanutbutter inside that somebody step onto. The cake just went flat before my eyes and I tried to fix it with what was supposed be a muffin topping. Hell I should be bricklayer not a baker.
The brightest children are almost four times more likely to suffer from the condition, also known as manic depression.
3. Squidalicious—first autism mama blog I ever read. Shannon Des Roches Rosa is funny, forthright, and evenhanded but is never afraid to take a stand (and she’s a great resource for autism-related iPad apps). She writes primarily about her son Leo, but his sisters Mali and Iz get considerable attention as well.
Still achieving, still pursuing,
Red: In the light spectrum, red is the color that gives off the longest wave length. Because of this, it is the easiest color to see. It tends to raise people’s blood pressure, but it also increases one’s energy levels. When you use shades of red, people will tend to see you as strong-willed, impulsive, inhibited, easily bored, decisive, and somewhat over-indulgent. You may give off an air of being one to stir up action, of being a go-getter, or of having manic tendencies. This is a color to be used strategically and carefully.
In Oakland, California, tear gas sent protesters fleeing a downtown intersection where they were demonstrating. It was unclear whether police fired the gas, but officers took four people into custody.
My favourite (so far, and to my recollection) is Goblet of Fire (I absorbed the whole thing, no contest my fave), with Prisoner of Azkaban (SIRIUS BLACK & Remis Lupin! *ahem* I don't actually remember the plot though XD) in 2nd place.
4. Since I was a young child, every time I drive by a cemetery, I look to see if it’s a place I want to be buried. When we lived in the NYC metropolitan area, I was always distressed at the way the graves were jammed up so close to each other, and that in some places the coffins were buried vertically, in order to make more room. I used to tell my parents not to bury me there, because I wanted a place with more “elbow room.” What was I thinking? I have since decided that I would prefer to be cremated. I was not morose about my plot-shopping. I just thought I was being practical. Plus I wanted to know where I should do some dancing before I die.)
What was the purpose of this Foundation? It was set up to promote the political beliefs of the Jamaat al-Islami. What were its political beliefs? Primarily it was, and still is, to spread sharia law not only to all Muslims, but also to all non-Muslims, throughout the globe – hence the Global Jihad.
Writing is about rewriting. That’s the learning process. That’s the time to take the script/manuscript apart, see what’s working and what’s not and then put it back together. And then do it all over again and again. Be willing to cut out sections that don’t work, whether it’s an entire act or one sentence. Writers fear that if they make changes they won’t know any other way to make it better. It’s the fear of the unknown which we all experience. But I say you can make it better. I know this for a fact. Even though at the time you don’t see how it could be different you can do it. If you generated the first idea you can certainly create a superior idea. Give it time but it’s there in your head, you just haven’t tapped into it yet. That’s what your love affair with writing is all about: Being willing to give up what you have written but have faith you will find a better way to express it.
I know for me and for a very long time I struggled with this and found myself sometimes feeling envious of other Christians, others who were recieving all these blessings. Everything they did prospered and I was angry, asking God why?, why are some more blessed than others?. Well with much anticipation, I recieved the answer. Although the answer was not what I expected, it gave me great joy and peace. Everyone that seem to be more blessed than you, are living not in the realm of the blessings but in the realm, where there is an abundance of grace, which Is found in My Son Jesus Christ, I have revealed this grace to them and they are bathing in it. It finally hit me, the reason why I am not blessed is not that I am not blessed, no, not at all, it is that I am looking in the wrong place to see and aknowledge my blessing in Christ, I was spending all my time looking at other peoples blessings, that I looked right pass all my blessings in grace. The blessings of God is found the atoning sacrifice, which is Jesus. In Jesus Christ all of the richness of God dwells and has been given to us as gift. Some of us however, have not yet recieved and understood the fullness of His grace, which overflows with total prosperity. Jesus overcame every sickness, pain and evil attack by the devil, so that we could be free from all of them. So why are we suffering with these same problems today?, well, We are not living in this complete and immeasurable gift from God.
Wishing you and your family a wonderful Christmas and holiday season!
Gross PA, Hermogenes AW, Sacks HS, Lau J, Levandowski RA. The efficacy of influenza vaccine in elderly persons. A meta-analysis and review of the literature. Ann Intern Med 1995; 123: 518-527.
In Solidarity,
But the real problem with D Publishing is its contract, which authors must sign if they want access to an ISBN and what limited distribution Dymocks offers (you can also use D Publishing as a formatter or a printer, in which case the contract isn't required).
Speaking to staff who worked for dg Arts while it existed, it was clear that the executive board knew about the state of the accounts and had been regularly informed about financial concerns. But certain payments to fund a small number of projects and individuals effectively cost local jobs for the real workers. Where were the checks and balances? Why did the Council-influenced board persist in appointing directors they could not afford or who weren’t able to manage budgets properly.
Deconstructed…fallen to pieces …it’s not the outcome but the fact of what I’ve become.
The idea started when I bought this buckboard bench at AC Moore. I got a really good deal on it. At the time I bought it they had a 50% off 2 items coupon. The way the coupon worked was that they took 50% off the highest priced item and then 50% off the next highest priced item. They took the discount off the bench and then it was still the highest priced item so their register took the discount off the bench again, so I got a $100 bench for $25!
This book comprises a deadpan diary-style account of a year in the life of the narrator, a not especially successful author who finds himself writing publicity material for firms in the oil and gas industry, having his job on a magazine downsized, going to readings where everything that is read is declared excellent. I think that the interest comes from the way that Danilov doesn’t tell us the kind of things you might expect in such a memoir, so the whole weight of literary expectation presses through the words we actually see on the page.
Thursday, July 14: The Flying Saucer will tap a cask of Divine Reserve No. 11 and promises more surprises when that runs out. One dollar per pint will be donated to TCH IBD Clinic.
Do you know about ScrapAce?! They offer one deal per day at a SUPER LOW PRICE!!! Sign up!! This My Mind's Eye Follow Your Heart (Rhonna Farrer) 6x6" pads and stamp sets was one of those great deals and this collection was just released at 2012 Winter CHA!!
He loves to ride his rocking horse. He gets off and gives it a kiss when the galloping sound stops.
The Video acceleration settings for the normal requirements will utilize a 3D graphics processor, this wіll include а Transform аnd Lighting feature inclusive of а sixty four megabytes Video Random Access Memory which іs sufficient to transmit high quality graphics. The ultra settings would bе twісe as much, uѕing а low of оnе hundred and twenty еight megabytes. These threе dimensional graphics cards act aѕ а buffer bеtwеen the RAM аnd Video RAM tо produce well screened images wіthіn а quick time frame, nоt noticed by thе naked eye.
By the time its publisher was awarded the prestigious James P. McNulty journalism prize in October 2011, NEXT had been reduced to a desultory web presence. That web site vanished some three weeks ago.
How can you be so greedy?
First publishing rights are a huge deal. You aren't going to land an agent or a trade publisher (read: NY publishing house) with a self-published book UNLESS you have immense sales and maybe not even then. Yes, yes...Amanda Hocking. I know. She had over a million sales, right? Okay...that's ONE author out of how many? According to Bowker, there were over 760,000 self-published books in 2009. Now think--how many other authors have you heard of with sales like this?
Adler SP. Cytomegalovirus. Grossman LB (Ed.). Infection Control in the Child Care Center and Preschool. Philadelphia PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, 2003.
Schmucker Meister Pils is a clear, yellow-gold with a loose head. I have to say, the initial taste made me wince. It's clean-tasting all right, but with a sweet edge, then the hops come in swiftly with a vaguely bile-like bitterness. It's a bit harsh, though not aggressively so, leaving an unpleasantly acrid finish. To be kind, i thought it might go better with some greasy food, but having another bottle with a BBQ a few days later it fared very badly with spicy, marinaded pork steaks. Not one I'd be in a hurry to try again.
Thur - Crispy Coconut Chicken strips w/ steamed broccoli. chicken is cut and ready to be dipped in the coconut mixture, broccoli comes in a ready to steam microwavable bag
After another round of hitting the books, I'll give it another shot.
January O'Neil: I think at this point we have 35 to 40 presses participating. It is a terrific way for local presses to get the word out to an audience. The Loom Press, Ibbetson Street, Salamander Magazine, Tuesday: An Art Project, and Zephyr Press are just a few of the presses that are participating.
We had a pleasant weekend.
Brazil has adopted these measures on Chinese goods in a bid to stem the flow of cheap imports, which is impacting the local industry and economy.
During the high school years the school offers a more stringent curriculum which Sophia is actually looking forward to, while also providing lots of fine arts and travel which is an environment Sophia would no doubt thrive in.
When you were young
S 23 50
“We will keep conducting raids until they’re all caught, then we’ll bring them for reeducation here.”
There are two types of friction and friction coefficients; static and dynamic. The static coefficient of friction measures the amount of energy required to move a stationary object across a surface. The dynamic coefficient of friction measures the energy required to keep an object moving. If you have ever moved furniture you will understand the difference. Getting a bookcase moving from a stationery position and getting it across a room require different levels of energy.
Oh ladies and gentlemen,
In these days I'm feeling a bit worried about a friend of mine who lives in Japan and I haven't been talking with him for 2 years. Maybe this summer I will go to Tokyo so I may see him, I'm quite scared of going to Japan alone but for a friend I will do it.
The brewery was a family owned and operated enterprise with a fiercely loyal customer base for over 100 years until it was bought out by the Miller Brewing Company in 1988. Some of the top executives at the brewery continue to be in the Leinenkugel family, but in today's world relinquishing of control to a major conglomerate like Miller could very easily spell the end of Leinie's at some time in the future. There won't be any more retooling to put out soda and near beer to weather some future economic storm; rather it will be the standard story of American industry: You're not making the cut any more. Goodbye. Lights out. And that would be a sad day.
"We will see what can be done," said Telenstil. "For now there are others, my companions, who we must rejoin. Then we can speak and discuss how to help your friends."
lash out from history’s hungry hunts.
I am a sucker for potato chips. I try not to have them in the house since I cannot resist them. If a bag is in the house, within two days they are gone…and that is with me showing restraint.
Great Leaders are STRONG, but not rude.
I met John back in my SNL days. Simply put – he stole my girlfriend. I was off doing a movie and when I returned to SNL my girlfriend at the time was dating John. But John was such a great guy we couldn’t help but to develop a friendship. 30 years later we are still great friends. As for the girlfriend, we aren’t too sure where she is nowadays.
After comparing Earlex's products with the patent as claimed, the judge dismissed the infringement claim. He then turned to the patent itself.
Running update: I am in week 5. On Monday, I ran three five minute runs, walking in between for three minutes or so. Actually, during one walking period, it was dark and a van drove up beside me on a deserted street and a creepy man got out so I just started sprinting up the block and cut my walk short.
Fact #16: ”There is no Zuul, only Sara Lomas”.
the lighthouse flash
1 cup (200 g) granulated white sugar
For example, when Tom could not put up with Phillip's consecutive insult and killed him on a ship, he ate heartily baguette bread just after his commitment of murder.
Additional charges are pending.
Artist Paul Nudd has organized STOMA (the post-COMA aroma) that is taking place at the former home of The California Occidental Museum of Art (COMA)an alternative space run by artists Erik Brown and Annika Seitz. When I found out about it, I saidDude that is one fucking sweet poster. So we know that COMA is closing? And Stoma is the final-ing of it? And it is like a stye? To which the reply wasis a stoma not an opening from an internal organ to an external device? like a colostomy bag? our goal is to find someone with a
8. Hard work and sweat are not to be feared or minimized. They feel DARN good!
Santa Fe Woman by Rolf Cahn
Here are the trailers:
Directions: The children sit in a circle close together. The child who is “It” stands away from the circle and hides their eyes while the fire is passed around. When “It” says "STOP!", the child holding the fire hides it (under their leg, up their sleeve, etc.). The child who is “It” guesses who has the fire. The child who had the fire is now “It”.
3 pamphlet
-Lay the candy (woo hoo!) on the waxed paper on the baking sheet, and refrigerate until solid.
Which roughly translated means they're Arabs and so can't get permits and because they can't get permits they can't settle and because they can't settle they are nomads and because they are nomads they can't get permits and, oh never mind.
Sallah is the guy around the city of Cairo that knows everyone has the connections and knowledge of the area unlike anyone and tries to live vicariously through Indy by helping him.
And living with him while he was on sick leave was hell on earth.
Everything was great and we were having some laughs when suddenly penises appeared and started waving all over the place. I stopped taking pictures at that point and started laughing very hard with my head down on the table. I know, I know -- it was the wrong decision, but I was taken by surprise by all the penises.
A ounce of weed and gun deep
We recently continued the hardwood floors in the kitchen (yea!), it looks so much better and now the floor isn’t so cold. Plus, that tile showed everything! Very frustrating from a cleaning perspective. Although I’m a pretty decisive person in general, I cannot decide on whether to do a rug in here or not. I love the look of the Persian rug in a kitchen like what Jenny has, but this area gets trashed and I’m afraid I would get sick of trying to keep the rug clean and free of debris. Maybe just a small one in front of the sink area?
My mom used to work as an occupational therapist. When I ask her about it, she tells me, “Everyone can do something.” My dad used to be a Marxist; he is fond of quoting “From each according to their abilities, to each according to their needs.” Disabled people have a lot of needs. We also have a lot of abilities. So here’s my idea: disabled people living together as each other’s support staff. Get a group together, and see if everyone giving what they can means everyone gets what they need.
I still believe. I believe with all my heart. One day someone will see me. And they won’t judge me, they will just care for me. Maybe even he will see me… fall in love with me. A girl can dream…
Not so for me. Sometimes home-construction tasks will turn the trick, but these can also become so demanding that they take up too much of my all-too-limited brainpower. Gardening works well sometimes, but not always, and that old standby, the shower, sometimes produces results--but one can only spend so long in the shower.
The role of international and domestic media will be to exacerbate these trends by airing arguments, concerns and confusions that will encourage insurgents and alarm Afghan and international domestic populations. In October 2008, US Defence Secretary Robert Gates correctly points out that:
Leave a comment and let me know you voted.
I will admit that my predisposition towards roomy drawers does sometimes come back to bite me in butt. Like when I can’t find a single white button-up shirt to wear with jeans because I’ve thrown them all away due to possibly-imaginary-but-really-probably-there yellow stains under the arms. Or when I want to craft a tie-curtain-dress masterpiece.
7. Chili powder, 1 teaspoon.
Sunday was wonderful to all attend church as a family. And it was really nice to have 2 adults to keep the boys in line! William enjoyed seeing many of his friends again and showing off his just-barely-long-enough-to-comb hair. He's counting down the days until school starts and even has his clothes picked out for the day. Recently, he has commented several times that he wished the summer was over so school would start. Perhaps I need to record that one on camera!
This year’s theme “Hawaii Calls” with the hapa haole songs of the first half of the 20th century was particularly refreshing. The opening song “Hawaiian Lullaby” gave me chicken skin as the children and staff surrounding me sang of the exact reasons that Hawaii calls to me every day. What a pleasure to feel that call today from these children.
And so I sucked it in, mustered the courage to enter the netherworld of the internet. And there they were, oodles of tom-dick-and-harries, awaiting their turn for a come-hither wink from a lonesome, crotchety old woman who may or may not give it up after a nervous respite to include perhaps three dinners, two movies and a hand-holding session on the couch. Short ones tall ones black ones brown ones…mostly glassy-eyed white pricks rubbing their well-oiled bottoms on their banana-seated harleys, tickling their big doggy tummies, exposing their wolfy teeth to the women of the netherworld.
The good can help. The bad will not or if they do, they “help” only to betray.
I’ll come home
promise. She knew he would not
The last move occurred when Frid, now the series’ superstar, demanded that he didn’t want to play Barnabas any more, and thus was indulged with a Wuthering Heights-ish plotline in which he became “Bramwell Collins.” The show unfortunately was cancelled during that flashback — with only a TV Guide article by one of the scripters (Sam Hall, married to the show’s “Dr. Julia Hoffman,” Grayson Hall) to explain where it would’ve gone after that.
Speaking of Christmas gifts, I thought I'd do y'all a favor and do some shopping consulting for you. Some people call it "personal shopping," but since I didn't actually make the purchase and am only providing some REALLY awesome options for you to act upon (or not), I think I'll call it "consulting" and charge you 10 times as much for my services.
Under the K+12 program, students will be taught new subjects and given vocational and technical training, and on-the-job training.This is to enable them to land a job after graduation. (from ABS-CBN News)
Here in the UK it seems that Shades of Grey are the only colours we've seen for most of the last few weeks but at least over on the Daring Cardmakers we've had some pretty colours to play with for our challenge this week.
But does that mean all that I had given to everyone so far is not worth anything?
Like I said before, we didn't camp at Negrito. Instead, we went off on a random road somewhere and found a spot to set up camp. J put up the tarp and set up our little area underneath, with the table and stove and everything. It was a pretty nice setup.
Today's card is based on a Challenge that was 'Yellow and One Other Colour' - I went for green, as i found some very old K & Co papers crying out to be used. I stamped out the image, then embossed it with CB 'Daisy Pattern', the edge round the frame is Memory Box 'Meridian Border' and i got the idea from the super talented Debby, thank you. I have put glossy accents in the middle of the daisies on the image and papers. The punched edge in the corner is MS 'Floral Lace'
What else is going on? After being out from my job for over a month I've more or less forgotten about it. I want to be a stay at home Mom now. All that it would take would be for the summer home to sell. Wishing and praying have yet to work. So any good home selling vibes you can send our way are appreciated!
Mr. Atallah: "You can't buy it if you don't take a bag."
Sam has a lovely blog and sells fabulous items in her Etsy shop, please take a look.
Cruising homeward.
I happen to have a painfully difficult individual in my life. Every time this person comes and verbally attacks me, I usually respond with the same level of intensity. (Not a good Idea)
Anyway, now that we've had a couple of days of veg'ing out in front of the TV, we're moving again. The Motel 6 up in Orlando is our next destination, being both cheaper and less in the line of fire (we hope). If the rains aren't too bad -- and so far they haven't been -- we might even hit Walt Disney World. The girls just have to agree on which park to visit.
05. Tiny Tim's Search For The Magic Princess
And, from that bit of awkward flippancy, we started to play ketchup from the years and lifetimes since we'd spoken. She told me of having a four and a half year old daughter and was shocked to hear mine was nearly eighteen. Once upon a time, I was the rarity, being a parent. Nowadays, the shock comes in the reminding that my whelp is at least ten years older than oldest of many of my friend's offspring.
Third, we must pursue the peace and joy that comes from experiencing forgiveness in Christ. Our sins are wrapped inside of other sins and it takes time and effort to get to the root of the problem. If we only confess the first layer of our sin, our sense of joy and peace will be as superficial (Ps. 51:14-17).
Query Shark: yes I read all the archives." fiction 78K words/historical/romantic/thriller.
cumin seeds- 1/4 tsp
Love cooking? Try these tasty, nutritious recipes:
After applying a crumb coating over the whole cake, and a second coating over the top of the cake, I started to decorate my sides. I was inspired by the red and yellow stripes of Martha Stewart's carnival cake, and thought the look would go perfectly with this cake. I had brainstormed different ways to make the carnival stripes, but in the end went with the original idea (see below, my brainstorming sketches for the cookies and the cake).
Jesus & The Mary Chain Happy when it rains UK
Physical Education
Accept that you’re going to make mistakes. You’re going to learn what works and what doesn’t, and so you need to figure out how you are going to incorporate continuous improve­ment into your social media strategy and practice. One important element of improvement is to be open to innovation from your staff. Chances are good many have significant experience in social media and can help suggest improve­ments.
MOST BEAUTIFUL: This is a tough one to start with. I'm not sure that anything I write is "beautiful". Still, if anything comes close to it, I suspect it must be this: Moments in a Life Well-Lived - the eulogy I delivered at my Grandfather's funeral.
I have a bunch of random things kicking around to post, so here's a mish mash of things.
and put them in their locker in between classes so no one sees me and they aren't embarrassed.
It was an opportunity to test the strength of the magnets, and none of my models came loose after 480 miles of driving, so that’s a good sign.
This beer was brewed in celebration of the 135th Anniversary of Schell's several years ago. It was so popular, we re-introduced it under the name German Pale Ale.
“Shake or become stiff”? Hello?!? That sounds very much like seizures to me.
The Fourth Decade (31-40) by @ekwem
OCTOBER 2007 AND JANUARY 2008: 33 VICTIMS AGED 12 TO 15
After a few days enjoying really great food and sight seeing in Arequipa, we made our way towards Arica, excited to see if our sprockets would be waiting for us.
The problem I see with Ms. Evans article is that she tends to put what she identifies as “cool” church in an ugly box. In other words, she paints an ugly picture of cool church and then says in essence, “Look how ugly that picture is!” For you philosophical types…it’s a straw man argument (i.e. a false argument – you can go deeper…Google it). That said, each style of church faces many of the same dangers…cool, uncool, contemporary, traditional, etc. For me, it’s not about cool or not cool. It’s about faithful or unfaithful. I love that we have multiple versions of worship. Each worship service in the church, regardless of worship style,s seeking to be faithful to following Christ.
I went to his wedding a few years ago, back when I first started dating Ross. I didn't really know anyone there. It was at Barr Mansion, and there was a seated stringed trio, and salad with pink dressing, and smiled anecdotes in the air about the couple and their courtship.
Sailors’ Bethel built at a cost of £2,000 to the design of Thos. Oliver Junior was opened on the 12th of April 1877. The word “Beth-el” is Hebrew for “House of God”, and in the 130 years of its existence this building has served as a nonconformist chapel, a community centre, a Danish seamen’s church and now, finally, offices.
For this attempt at a table beer I decided to use millet as my adjunct grain. When I was looking for exotic grains this was the only thing that I could find easily. Ive had millet a few times at ethnic restaurants and I wasn't really ever that impressed. It was always a slightly nutty mush pile that in my opinion need a bit of texture to make it worth eating. Somehow though I have a feeling that it will work in beer much better though. To try and help that along I decided to pan toast the millet until became fragrant and started popping. I'm hoping this will help to bring out the nutty flavors in the beer. Strangely thought toasting the millet didn't result in much color development.
If you know that you belong to Him is it wise to try to work out the details of your own life? Is it right to leave the Lord out of your plans? Paul would not think of doing such a thing for this Roman trip was only of the Lord. He would rest in the Lord and wait patiently for Him.
Here's project #1...
I want you to be happy and complete with yourself emotionally and mentally, and then I want to see if I can fit in there somewhere.
No more will I take the blame
that breath of fresh air, while also boosting its
And to completely change the topic.
So I wrap my yearning arms around him,
So why the nose? Simple. There is no better way to focus on this moment, the right now, than focusing on your nose. It isn’t in the future making plans and it certainly isn’t in the past licking its wounds. It is commonly accepted that the only thing we ever have is this moment in time. For me, this moment involves the thoughts and musings that are required to write this post. For you, it depends on where you are. It may involve your laptop and coffee on a Saturday morning. Or it may be your lunch at your desk on a Monday afternoon. Regardless of the what, one fact the remains—this moment is all that we have.
Raymond and Beverly Sackler
June total: $142.10
Not for myself, necessarily. For all you grumpy, pissed-off, driving-like-idiots-on-speed, rude-ass people out there I have to deal with on a daily basis.
Judge Koh was ruling on a joint motion by the defendant companies to dismiss the complaint filed under the Sherman Act and Cartwright Act antitrust laws.
I need to write a bio. Weeks ago over at Shooting Stars the same question was asked. This is what I came up with - quirky. But now that I actually have to submit one (no I don't have an agent yet, this was a prerequisite once I queried), quirky won't work. I think.
The Dwemer had clearly delved deep into the mountainside as at one point natural caverns broke the monotony of stone and brass piping. It was here that Se’rith and Brelyna began to see symbols and totems very similar to the one they had seen in Shimmermist Cave and soon enough they stumbled upon one of the blind creatures. Its keen sense of hearing picked up their approach and it launched itself from its perch brandishing a chitin sword that was as sharp as any steel Se’rith had ever seen. As they moved further into the earth they saw many of these dead creatures, what had Mirabelle called them, Falmer. Amidst their twisted corpses the remains of Dwemer constructs were scattered about. Some battle must have been fought here. Maybe the Falmer had settled in the ruins and the constructs, programmed to defend the city, reacted. Judging by the amount of scrap metal these Falmer were to be respected. After a further hour, through which they travelled through natural caverns and attacked by some sort of centipede looking like monstrosity of chitin, they arrived in a large chamber were the largest, and darkest Falmer they had just seen sat on a chitin throne a large gem set in an amulet around its neck.
“Yeh, that’s cool. I wanna make sure I’m in town in the morning. The post office is only open for two hours in the morning and I have a package to pick up.”
Wednesday - BBQ Chicken Ranch Salads: We have a late appointment so these salads will be easy to throw together before we have to head out the door.
Holy time, yes
He poses three interesting question at the end of this post:
In the same period that we shrank to 60% our previous maximum size, Continental doubled. Their once paltry list of Foreign destinations now dwarfs ours. They turned profits while we posted losses. They are hiring while we still have 1400+ pilots on the street. They have hired a far greater percentage of employees than us in recent years. They have demonstrated a management culture that, while it may not be Santa-Claus-on-a bicycle, certainly has produced an environment that is more user/employee friendly than ours ever was.
Saving the best till last. If you make your own earring wires and struggle to get them even then you don't want to miss this tip. Instructions and photos here.
In other words, I've got shit to lose. Even if I have a stupid impulse (and these are more and more rare as I age), it only takes me a moment to consider the negative consequences of acting on it. Impulse purged.
BM: Yeah I think so, and it tells about the actual decisions and how our history depends on people’s character in moments of crisis.
26. Back Up Offa Me
This morning I did the workout of the day after class was over and I was by myself in the box. That’s starting to become more usual for me, and while it can be hard to push myself, I have started to appreciate the solitude. The workout felt solid,and I felt good about my performance overall. And then I thought, I really should see if I can do those chest-to-bar pull-ups. Pull-ups are tough, one of those bodyweight gymnastics movements that may have seemed easy when you were a 40-pound child going wild at the playground monkey bars, but I can do them. Mind you, however, I haven’t attempted a chest-to-bar pull-up since a year ago, and then only because it was part of the Crossfit Games workouts. Back then I was hoping to accomplish 1 in the allotted time, and I think I managed 10 total, with a lot of crazy effort and encouragement from my coach.
Well, the answer can be found in what Mugabe has termed the 'Second Liberation'. The First Liberation obviously being de-colonialization followed by black self-rule. Brushing aside the obligatory old-hat Marxist rhetoric and fashionable anti-White platitudes, one quickly comes to the stark realization that what Mugabe has in mind is firstly, a recipe for ruin untold and, secondly, rationally unavoidable.
Dessert: Mrs. Truman's Coconut Balls
By 1611 Gutenberg presses were widespread. This fostered rapid distribution of the King James Bible throughout the English-speaking world.
I’ll write more soon.
at the clock with no hands that go round
At least nine people were arrested for blocking roads in Tel Aviv.
Once cooked, remove from the pan and rest briefly on paper towels before placing on a serving dish. Finish off with a sprinkle of sea salt.
One editor you do want to know is John Locke who here has gathered some great articles from the publishing trade magazines of the 20s up through the end of the pulp era. Together, the articles give an insider's look at the fiction factories that tried to sate the public's boundless appetite for reading material. The sometimes tenuous relationship between author and editor (and many personages in the book were both) is explored from both sides. Writers and editors express both admiration and exasperation towards the other party, usually with a good deal of jabbing humor thrown in. A publisher might have just a few pulp titles or up to dozens but was always on the lookout for the particular brand of fiction the readers of each magazine craved. A new talent was a discovery to be cultivated, and the goal of editors was to cultivate ultra-prolific authors that could become a familiar name fans associated the magazine. Of course, finding the time to do this while performing the daily tasks of sifting through mountains of stories while also seeing to the business of magazine production was difficult, and often communications were short and sweet. Sometimes the author might not get much more than a rejection slip. The editors make it clear that they have no time for handwritten or single-spaced typed pages or for stories that do not fit the genre and character of their magazines. This was a popular, money-making exercise, and good editors had a pretty clear idea what they were selling. A sharp author kept his eye on exactly what each magazine was buying and followed the trends. I daresay there's plenty of useful information in here for the modern writer as well.
I went to the University of Virginia for my undergraduate degree and then immediately went to law school afterwards at the Dickinson School of Law in Carlisle, PA . As I said, I pursued design shortly thereafter (and at the strong encouragement and support of my parents), while somewhat reluctant because my father is a lawyer. I soon realized, though, that I made the correct decision and feel this was my true calling. I love what I do and wake up looking forward to it every day.
These days, the most common question I get from junior analysts about derivatives is, “How much money did we make off the client?” It bothers me every time I hear it, because it is a clear reflection of what they are observing from their leaders about the way they should behave. Now project 10 years into the future: You don’t have to be a rocket scientist to figure out that the junior analyst sitting quietly in the corner of the room hearing about “muppets,” “ripping eyeballs out” and “getting paid” doesn’t exactly turn into a model citizen.
Cannot wait for school to end. Stay tuned next week for the final Baking Competition results.
I saw this at a very low price on amazon (I think 0.99 or something like that) and I. Couldn't. Resist. Lately I've been enjoying mythological YA themed books, so of course I couldn't let this pass. And the first book I read by Maria V. Snyder was Touch of Power and I immediately fell in love with her writing. Poison Study has been on my wishlist for a long time, and I couldn't wait to read something else by the author.
the MITM, his brother and sister agreed with the doctors that this was the best move possible for her. she is unplugged and unpoked and un-prodded and now actively dying.. as she said while i was there, is the end near?
The un-incarcerated half of The Mobb drops a new joint...
One thing we noticed all over Greece – little roadside shrines dotting the side of the road. I’ve read that these are not only to commemorate victims of traffic accidents, but also are used as offerings of thanks by survivors of car accidents. Either way, they were fascinating to take a peek at:
And the lucky girls, Chloe Thiel, Anita Munro and Xanthe Dunning, couldn't be more excited for opening night.
These numbers are another warning sign that Congressional Democrats need to get some things accomplished to keep the base on board. Their numbers aren't declining because of unhappiness from conservatives- that ship sailed a long time ago. It's because Democrats and Democratic leaning independents are getting frustrated at the slow rate of progress on key issues they care about.
Blogger is not letting me comment at the moment ( v.frustrating ) so I can't let you lovelies know but if you see this and want to join in that's great . If not I COMPLETELY understand .
And color me shocked when four other classmates showed up! One I hadn't seen since 1983! Again, we chatted as if no time has passed. Some had gotten married and had children but as one friend put it "I still see everyone as kids".
I wish I could say that I thought up this whole cake idea on my own. No...I'm just good at copying. I found my inspiration from coolest-birthday-cakes.com. So I put together some different ideas that were shared on that site to come up with this cake. The train tracks were made from the Keebler chocolated covered wafer cookies, chocolate licorice, and smashed graham crackers put in between the tracks to look like dirt.
“That’s beautiful, Dad. You should set it to music.”
I assembled about an hour before.
What is the state’s plan with Nonadanga?
God’s love for us is the greatest of all the gifts which He has given. Our very lives are products of God’s love. If God did not love we would not exist. If God did not love all the pleasures we enjoy in life would never have been woven into the world. It is God’s love that is behind every gift and blessing that we have ever enjoyed.
Pastrami Queen, on the upper east side of Manhattan, is one of the few remaining hold outs of classic Jewish Deli tradition. Pastrami Queen is also under Kosher supervision, but it is not “Glatt” like Liebman’s in the Bronx. The only other well-known deli that has actual Kosher status in Manhattan is 2nd Avenue.
The Oatman Hotel is famous for many things from who used to lay their hats there to the claims of ghosts roaming around the building. The hotel was built in 1902 and is the oldest two-story adobe structure in town and all of Mohave County. Many miners, politicians, lawmen, outlaws, and movie stars stayed in the lavish rooms. After being married in Kingman on March 18, 1939, Clark Gable and Carol Lombard honeymooned at the Oatman Hotel. The remoteness of the place was one of the reasons Gable kept coming back to the hotel. He also enjoyed playing poker with the miners. Today, visitors and staff have heard laughing and whispering coming from the unoccupied room the two stayed in. One claim is when a photographer took a picture of the empty room, an apparition of a man appeared in one of the photos. Other ghost seen in the hotel is that of an Irish miner named William Ray Flour. The story is told that his entire family died on the way to American and he was so upset that he began drinking heavily. He ended up drinking himself to death, died behind the hotel, and his body was found two days later. The staff just buried him in a shallow grave right where he died. His ghost has been seen in his old room and the hotel staff has named him “Oatie”. Oatie likes to play pranks such as opening windows and pulling off sheets in his old room. People have reported hearing a bagpipe sound coming from his former room as well as feeling a cold spot with it is very hot outside.
This variety of insistence on only “one right way” of doing things, and that one practice or one tradition or one pantheon should be sufficient and whole unto itself to minister to any individual’s every spiritual need, to the exclusion of (and even demeaning of) all else outside of that tradition, is something that has an entirely creedal monotheistic origin, and has no real place within a polytheist framework, where pluralism is the rule and the repeatedly demonstrable preference at every point. The notion that polytheist religions are religions of “orthopraxy” rather than “orthodoxy” is often as ill-conceived as the notion that “orthodoxy” and questions of belief really matter within polytheism at all. The on-the-ground realities in most places in the premodern polytheistic worlds were polypraxy; no matter what deities or practices may have been shared outside of local contexts, everyone had their own way of doing things, and each community developed their own calendar, their own demeanor, and any number of other diversifying and differentiating characteristics. And, this was all good and no one seemed to get too upset about it! So, the notion that one orthopraxy must be enforced, or is a viable ideal, within polytheism–even of a reconstructionist variety–is one that I don’t personally think is very useful.
Meals Included: Breakfast
1 tablespoon real vanilla extract
Yes, calling a holy book, or part of it’s contents, “bullshit” is sometimes accurate (I often say similar words about things that about the Q’ran) however, saying the things he said in a pre-planned speech, to a group of high school students, was bullying. This wasn’t said in the heat of the moment, when he was angry at someone coming after him personally, this was pre-meditated and there is no way he did not know that many students and teachers in that crowd would be Christians. That would be a statistical improbability.
Using wooden spoon, gently fold in fl our.
2.armchair hero
In this scenario, the consumers are highly aware of the task they have and are actively looking out for solutions to fulfill it. But the ability of the product to accomplish the task may not be evident right away. Marketing is therefore vital to bridge that gap of understanding. A story needs to be told about how the product acts and delivers impact on people’s life.
How was I supposed to figure out how to make a quilt? I decided to do what any other great mind would do…..look on youtube. Lol! I watched so many videos, I don’t know “who” is responsible for teaching me “what”. The next thing I know, I’m searching the house for materials to complete this project. You know my motto, “use watcha got”. I meant to say it just like that.
Yes LOVE with all caps! It is wonderful and I am thankful everyday that life has turned out this way. I would like to thank my previous job for letting me go. Because while it was not good at the time and I was very sad and upset about it, this change has been the best thing for my family and I believe it will keep getting better and better.
Mental note: bring a street-smart boy with me the next time a car wash is in order.
"I Like you on FB"
5. Thus at the beginning of his address in Constantinople, on Christmas Day in 379 or 380, St Gregory Nazianzen uses some expressions of Psalm 95: “Christ is born: glorify him! Christ comes down from heaven: go to meet him! Christ is on earth: Be exalted! “Sing to the Lord, all the earth!’ (v. 1) and, to combine the two concepts, “Let the heavens be glad, and let the earth rejoice’ (v. 11), because of Him who is of heaven and then of earth” (Omelie sulla natività, Discorso 38, 1, Rome 1983, p. 44; Oration 38 on the Birthday of Christ, 1., Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers, vol 7, p. 345, reprinted by Eerdmans March, 1989).
I don’t want you to think The Host is all plodding inner monologues, though. There’s definitely some good action and suspense in it, as well as a hefty helping of romance. Twilight it is not, but don’t be fooled: Meyer is a sucker for love triangles. Although, to be fair, The Host has more of a love square.
This year the Glastonbury Festival marks its fortieth anniversary, the first (then free) festival taking place on a cobbled together tubular steel and wooden plank stage in 1971. In order to celebrate the fact, a ‘Spirit of ‘71’ stage was included this year where many of those who performed in 1971 returned to the scene of their crimes to perform to nostalgic on-lookers. To see the likes of Melanie and Edgar Broughton belting out old familiar numbers even gave hardened old cynic me a misty eye.
I sort of stumbled over the orange peach and apple fabric a few weeks ago, and I think the fabric really set off the entire piece.
An Interview with Buster Grant. Buster is the Chairman of the Association of Welsh Independent Brewers as well as brewer at Breconshire Brewery. It was talking with him whilst down at the GWBCF that the thought of a specific Welsh beer festival first formed. He'll be talking about the history of brewing in Wales and what the future may have in store for us.
let contents = Buffer.contents buffer in Printf.printf "%d bytes in %d blocks, EOB = %010x%!" (String.length contents) !tot (pos_in inch); contents in let verify_logical_screen_descriptor inch = let width = input_le16 inch in let height = input_le16 inch in let fields = input_byte inch in let backgr = input_byte inch in let aspect = input_byte inch in Printf.printf "LSD w = %d, h = %d, f = %2x, b = %d, a = %d" width height fields backgr aspect; if fields land 0x80 == 0x80 then verify_color_table (1 + fields land 0x07) inch in let verify_image_descriptor inch = let left = input_le16 inch in let top = input_le16 inch in let width = input_le16 inch in let height = input_le16 inch in let fields = input_byte inch in Printf.printf "ID x = %d, y = %d, w = %d, h = %d, f = %2x" left top width height fields; if fields land 0x80 = 0x80 then verify_color_table (1 + fields land 0x07) inch in let verify_table_based_image inch = verify_image_descriptor inch; let bits = input_byte inch in Printf.printf "IMG code size = %d, " bits; ignore (verify_blocks inch) in let verify_plain_text_extension inch = check (12 == input_byte inch) "Expected block size = 12"; let left = input_le16 inch in let top = input_le16 inch in let width = input_le16 inch in let height = input_le16 inch in let _celwid = input_byte inch in let _celhgt = input_byte inch in let _fgcol = input_byte inch in let _bgcol = input_byte inch in Printf.printf "PTE l = %d, t = %d, w = %d, h = %d " left top width height;
How it works: The mosquitoes will be attracted to the CO2 generated by the yeast and will fly into the bottle. The sugar and water mixture will make them sticky, and they will be too disoriented to escape.
For most of my young adult life (using “young adult” in the loose sense of “since I was about fifteen”), I have struggled with this. I always put off the next big step as long as possible, because I think I ultimately see it as a loss: one more box checked off on the list of life ambitions, one less thing to look forward to. I remember being somewhat horrified (at the time I couldn’t explain why) when one of my dearest friends in college started a “countdown” to graduation at the beginning of our last semester. She put the number on her bedroom door, and every day I walked by and thought, not, “46 days to graduation” but “46 days closer to mediocrity.” I attend the weddings of friends and try not think, “They’re almost there.” I’m ashamed of myself for wanting to marry and settle down and raise a family because it seems like longing for the very constriction I dread.
Where the book falls down though is (once again) the mere hint of the esoteric. I don’t mind fantasy elements in novels like this, but Auel is incredily half-arsed about it. There is a lot less of it in this than in the first but it does feel slightly out of place and superficial with no real point. Again, I would have preferred either the fantasy to play a bigger part than it actually does or that it is omitted entirely.
"Maybe it's a perfect storm," he said of the Trayvon Martin tragedy.
4 T. butter
The nurse looked at me, eyebrows raised. I kinda shrugged. "At least he didn't try to skateboard off the top this time." Another nurse standing nearby, stopped what he was doing and looked up, an expression of half-shock, half-awe on his face. The medical professional in him was thinking how dangerous such an endeavour would be. But the guy in him was thinking, Oh yeah, wicked cool!
Deep mahogany to black in color
Homeopathic remedies that I usually have on hand include:
Thank you for submitting your story for consideration. Sadly, it does not meet the criteria for our list. One of the criteria is 'not written by Stroppy Author.' Please read our submission guidelines more carefully in future.
Sailing free from white cliffs, ,
Not only has Quaker joined forces with the popular Jo Bro, but also with the non-profit organization Little Kids Rock to make music education more accessible in schools across the nation. The Quaker Chewy Superstar Search is a win/win all around!
Today we enjoyed having local author Colleen Smith at the Denver store for a discussion and signing of her new book, The Laid-Back Skier. We are excited to have it on the shelves at Swoozie’s; the whimsical illustration is delightful, and the spirit is playful. Read below to learn a little bit more about Colleen and the inspiration behind her new book.
-“I didn’t know that clouds can have names too. I thought clouds are clouds , just bearer of hope and life for barren lands.”
“I don’t know if that would have had the impact, the same meaning if it wasn’t tied into something visceral. The picture shows the consequences of the statement that the Bible makes.”
Joey: What?
I stand by my initial impression, however. Comeragh Challenger tastes very much like Helvick Gold only a little more bitter. As Helvick is one of my favourite Irish beers, especially from the cask, this is by no means a criticism.
I also always have a pair of my favorite flip-flops in my gear bag to put on when I am done. It feels amazing to me to take off my running shoes at the end of a race and slip on my favorite Reef flip flops.
Regarding brain functioning, it is important to refer to the cerebellum, the area of the brain responsible for voluntary physical movement is connected by neurons to all parts of the cortex, the area of the brain responsible for higher order thinking. Nearly 80 studies have suggested a strong link between the movement and memory, spatial perception, language, attention, emotion, nonverbal cues, and decision-making (Jensen, 1998).
از کشاد او کشاد آسیا
Catharsis #1
To date we have a film crew lined up (still looking for an editing team), a Lakota Drummer, a Wrangler (to round you up) , a Youtube site on reserve, and the enthusiasm of many!
To paraphrase Tony Stark (because I can’t find the quote on Google), Tom Hiddleston is everything America expects an English villain to be. He a camp, over-the-top diva who is utterly evil and wants nothing more than the downfall of the United States (and, as a result, the world). Surprisingly, this is not a criticism. Loki camps it up as an immortal, power-hungry monster as only an ancient god can. As a man with huge power, a thirst for revenge and (as he sees it) a divine and immutable right to rule the world, there is no other way to play it than scene-chewingly angry. He faces every challenge with a curved lip or victorious smile. I loved every second he was on-screen. Even more so once defeat becomes inevitable.
Emme - "Do you think he is okay with me reading his books?"
Sorry for the delay...again in updating
11. Now it's time to pin. If you want to machine quilt your quilt then pinning is the best and easiest way. You can use a basting spray but I am wary of using them with little people around or when I'm pregnant. Which seems to be most of the time. They are pretty toxic and I don't have a garage or suitable space outdoors to spray in. So I like to use large quilting safety pins and pin every few inches.
Needless to say I think it was a hit because every visitor that we've had so far has been shown the grand tour - Oh Christmas Tree. She keeps un-decorating and re-decorating the tree....
Here is the recipe for her out of this world Rice Krispie Treats that we made from her book this weekend.
"Please," I said, hurried now, sensing a window closing. "Can you tell me anything about him?"
Someone's been a very bad zombie.
Tie a pretty ribbon into a bow around the tin and elastic to hide it. Stick down your scallop paper with number and tie some pretty lace or ric rac around the bottom of each tin.
in the meadow sky, the snow still arriving
Finish – Long and flavor-filled, lead by sweet fruit that gently yields to tart and subtle flavors of flowers, soft spice and a hint of slate. A soft dryness then encroaches, spreading all around the palate, eventually puckering the lips and drying the cheeks.
For those who don't know what colcannon is, it's an Irish dish. It's mashed potatoes with onions and kale, sometimes cabbage instead of kale. The reason I always refused to it was because of the kale/cabbage and my whole "I don't eat that stuff" thing. We still had some kale from last week's CSA box and my husband REALLY wanted colcannon so I figured I'd indulge him. He wanted to make it but I have a feeling his wouldn't have been anywhere near as good. I looked in my cookbooks and found a good recipe in Gary Rhodes' New British Classics. Gary never disappoints and this time it was no exception. Of course, I didn't follow the recipe to the T, I did make changes that I think made it SO much better. The colcannon was definitely the star of the show but the protein was fish, and it was good too!
1 excitement
There are gaps in the story of events leading to Mohamed’s death which raise unanswered questions. I don’t have every detail, but I want to share what I have read and heard with you. I believe it is important that we examine these facts, if only for the sake of his family as they contend with their grief. This is my own interpretation, and may need editing or updating to provide a more complete and accurate account.
Without a doubt, one of the most unique things about Bastion is its real-time reactive narration. Eliminating the need for extended cut-scenes, Rucks narrates everything as it comes without disturbing the flow of battle or the wonder of exploration. It’s unlike any narrative technique I’ve ever seen before in a game, and one thing that particularly struck me was how you can only find out certain things by willfully destroying the remains of people caught up in the Calamity.
Haircut finished, with more gray and white strands visible as my aging process continues, I drive home. The radio weatherwoman's morning predictions have been confirmed by my car's thermometer -- 91 degrees outside. Two days ago and earlier we were having daytime 60+ degree temperatures. Tomorrow will cool down with a return to 60+ degrees and rain by Sunday.
A few fresh chives, finely diced
Yes I’m into the whole indie-rock scene. Minus The Bear is one of my favorites. If you’re new to this genre, you should listen to them.
NOTE: Makes References to the Leaked Script from November, but few to no spoilers.
Learn home brewing techniques from the Kansas City Home Brew club.
We’ve been plowing the fields in preparation for planting. The alfalfa has greened up. There was plenty of moisture over the course of the winter but not so much that the fields are a muddy mess … yet. April showers could easily change that.
Here are my first entries for the challenge:
I am finally done with this book. I have to enlarge the screen so I can see the letters I am typing because my eyes are so blurry and hurt from the strain of reading so many hours. I am a lover of books – I can not help it. Can I just mention, once again, that I still love the story “Supernaturals”, “Woman in Black” and “The Man in the Painting”? I know, this is about The Lantern but the residue of these other books is always with me and, unfortunately or not, what I am comparing all the other ghost stories too.
“I’m glad that we can debate theology and know terms that make us seem intelligent and cause other people to scratch their heads; however, at the end of the day people are not asking about the five points of Calvinism, the trichotomy or dichotomy of the Spirit or the peccability/impeccability of Christ! They are asking “why is my life falling apart?” Or, “how do I get past the fact that I was sexually molested when I was eight?” Or, “how do I, as a single mom, lead and provide for my family?”
Frame border is Prima marketing stamp
for only one thing
Some strains CAN cause disease in the small intestine. They start by causing diarrhea and they release toxins that inflame the lining of the small intestine and the colon. There is a third strain and this is the one I hate (only because it's the one Colby had), it's called E.coli 0157:H7. It causes inflamed intestines, colon and bloody diarrhea.
I saw. I conquered. Couldn’t come. –David Lodge
The latter part of Proverbs 3:35 says that shame shall be the promotion of fools. In other words, fools will know shame. Take a few minutes and see how the Bible describes fools. These people will know “greater,” but it will be shame because they refuse wisdom. What then, is the opposite option?
Pennard Castle
Now that widely reported new allegations say that NotW, under Coulson’s editorship, hacked so many people’s phones (including one belonging to a murdered child, phones belonging to the families of 7/7 bombing victims and the phones of dead soldiers) is it inconceivable that a politician suing the newspaper for slander would also be having his phone hacked?
The volume of our gray matter normally reduces as we get older and this is what the scientists found in the group of non-meditators. But for the meditators, their gray matter hadn’t reduced at all with age. According to the scientists, meditation had a ‘neuroprotective’ effect on the meditators: It protected the brain from some of the effects of aging.
If I'm being honest with myself, the only real option is creating some sort of gallery wall that incorporates the TV...
I should have never doubted Kagawa’s storytelling ability. While the story isn’t wholly original, girl turned into monster tries to fight her inner demons and save some of her humanity, Kagawa managed to breathe new life (pardon the pun) into this story.
The "SHOPPING" aspect of Flourishes may take a bit of time to work properly for everyone. For example, I am seeing everything as it is supposed to be, but some folks may not have everything working smoothly. The internet takes a while for new information to "populate" to web servers throughout the country and the world.
Every person’s responsibility is to nurture love and bring it into this world.
As I didn’t really workout at all yesterday, I did one of Ben Hanbridge’s interval training sessions: I think I need to work on my core strength too… Those planks hurt today and I got the body trembles. The cardio is great but maybe I need to do a weights session once a week too. After Fast Track 2 finishes, I shall prepare a new exercise plan and a new menu plan. I have to make sure I have strategies in place for when I accompany Nick to Fishing events from the end of this month onwards!
31 or
Talking of lie-ins, I certainly won't have had one today (this post was drafted last night) because it is the start of London Fashion Week (of course you all knew that already) and I shall be winging my way to the Capital on the red eye (commuter coach) for a day that starts with the Antoni and Alison show at 9am in the courtyard show space at Somerset House! So if you have any interest in Fashion Week proceedings be sure to keep an eye out as I will be tweeting directly from the Cobbles. My youngest daughter will be coming with me but she has her own Agenda with a very exciting project to do for a brand. She is a lucky girl to have been chosen and this will help her tremendously with her Fashion Course at Uni.
this by the Semi Truck full and making a spectacle of
thank you for taking this ride with me,
One thing really jumped out at me in the conversation. Alex said "I know this is all for my own good. I know that what my mother is doing is for my own good." My immediate thought to that, which I did say, was to be careful with the phrasing "for your own good", it's the excuse that abusers use to continue abuse, and commonly used to control and manipulate others.
Matty has a new neighbor, and she strongly suspects the kilt-wearing hottie is a vampire—he only goes out at night, has weird visitors and the blood bank is making regular deliveries. But he doesn’t seem to hurt anyone, so “live and let live” is Matty’s motto. Until she sees a guy armed with crosses and wooden stakes breaking into the neighbor’s house. Matty charges to the rescue—and ends up in Mr. Hottie’s
PRETORIA -- Correctional Services Minister Sipo Mzimela yesterday announced a special six-month remission for all sentenced prisoners to mark President Nelson Mandela's birthday.
Disgust.
“The heart fluttering sensation experienced by women of a certain age upon seeing a man of much younger years, usually sporting six-pack abs, boyish innocence, and a clear willingness to learn. Side effects include: unclean thoughts, raised hemlines, and a deep desire to take on the role of tutor.”
These symptoms are the result of deep systemic issues. Treating symptoms is necessary and good, but you can’t cure a disease by treating the symptoms.
Find me God, find this empty place
Listed below are a few recommendations for creating a quality first impression that will hopefully enable sustained interaction in whatever capacity.
But this execution was a bit more bizarre because, in the end, you really wanted this ATF Agent to get her head blown off. She was a real scum bag. This brings me to the point of this web-log entry.
I also spent my week listening to Royal Foundlings first album. I saw all the pictures from the Texas Tour, laughed a lot, and wait, now, the new tunes... I don't know when I will have the time to think about their bio and tour, but, I may not be alone on this project ! I'm impatient !!!
universal light,
And, since we are renting this little duplex, the foot traffic marks on the light carpet were worrying me to death - - - so I practically recarpeted with inexpensive runners and rugs.
Good ol' small towns. Gotta love them.
All good stuff, but in our quest to make this a learning resource, there are two things that are most exciting to me. The first is that teachers are running with it. Some have even made Food their focus for the term, with a soup theme bubbling up—both metaphorically and literally. They’ll be reading soup books, discussing food and making soup using plants from our garden (we’re crossing our collective fingers for a good spring harvest). We’re also revivifying composting at the school. We’ll be having a composting workshop and assembly, but in the meantime, one teacher created a lesson plan for other classes to discuss what can go in the bins. Teachers have also been talking to the children about what we should be planting this year. Peas, raspberries, strawberries are all on the list. (As are bananas and mangoes….not likely in our northern climate.)
(A huge smile spread across his face...a devious, mischievous smile) What did you have in mind?
I send this warning out- if you start to feel a clogged duct- take care of it as quickly as possible because Mastitis is not just a pain in the boob but a pain in the......
4. Spread chana, lemon juiceand chopped coriander leaves. Toss it so that it gets evenly mixed with the potatoes.
Congratulations, Zenyatta!
But to be blunt, those companies will crunch the numbers. If they come out ahead in what they will recover versus what it will cost, then my guess is they will do it. It certainly won't be altruistic.
arrows, the moon
Yoochun tried to make Junsu comfortable with him. He ask to vampire elder how to make a vampire like him not so often drink human blood.
Media term it "summit fever", the apparent callousness that drives mountaineers to disregard ethics on their Everest ascents, sometimes literally climbing over dead bodies to reach their goals. But whatever the preparation and outlandish cost, perhaps it's not simply ruthless determination that makes someone abandon their team mates, and yet still have the energy to summit. In such alien conditions, utterly hostile to human life, climbers might face their own mortality. Under the spectre of pure, unadulterated fear, they must realize that they are beyond help as well as beyond helping anyone else.
NICE Guidelines
Now that I know for sure about NYC, I'm contemplating joining Kim for a crazy east coast double-header. She is registered & ticket bought for a Saturday half in NJ and Sunday half in DE in late October. It would be a blast of a girl's weekend. The only thing holding me back is...yes...the fact that I'm not running right now due to this damned plantar fasciitis. Should I do it anyway? What deadline should I set to decide, knowing that airfare is affordable right now and race registration could fill up...?
This flexibility proved vital to my family’s survival when, two years into this proud display of my writing’s worth, Ron committed suicide.
How frightening?
Students and scholars of the Fourth Gospel should feel indebted to Carter for making Rome visible in the narrative in a way that reflects the realities of life under Roman rule. He is correct in his assertion that Johannine scholars have long overlooked Rome’s presence in the narrative. Further, his argument is immersed in a strong awareness of Roman political and societal issues as well as a breadth of secondary literature, and these strengths will surely open new vistas for those interested in Rome as it relates to NT studies. Nevertheless, despite the valuable contributions that can be mined from the margins of his work, Carter’s main thesis is problematic for several reasons.
OH! I keep meaning to blog about this! The company I work for sells Dysp*rt, which is the direct competitor of Bot*x and I got to get a little facial maintenance done as a model for the training class!! Basically, I had 50ccs of the injectible placed right between my eyebrows. It barely hurt and it's fabulous!! Now, when I frown, you don't see the lines! I want to get the rest of my forehead done now but will have to pay for that out of pocket. We do get some amount of reimbursement so I'm looking into it. We also do fillers so I'm hoping the next time the training class comes in, they'll pick me to be the model to have that done. I could use a little filler around my mouth! I took this picture of myself this morning to show my hubs how I was smiling through the pain! I wish my bangs weren't in the way and you could see what I'm talking about..
Proverbs 29:25 But he who trusts in the LORD will be exalted.
I am an advocate for not eating processed food, for not eating at night and for planning, counting calories by weighing and measuring. It may not be the way you want to lose, or the way you have lost...but if you are like ME, it is the only way!
Leon Greco has an accident, with a brain injury as a result. A new treatment has a side effect. It increases his intelligence exponentially. So much so that he becomes of interest to the CIA, who would like him to work for them.
There are many reasons to be cynical about modern elections, but one functional benefit they provide - at least in seriously contested races - is to force incumbents to defend their practices, raise up alternative approaches, and generally provide an opportunity for public debate about the minutiae of a job that normally is never the subject of media coverage nor even public conversation. In that vein, the Austin Chronicle has an interesting back-and-forth interview/comparison with Travis County DA candidates, incumbent Rosemary Lehmberg and challenger former Court of Criminal Appeals and District Judge Charlie Baird. (See the Chron's earlier coverage of the race.) The first item on the Chron's list is of issues "Wrongful Convictions," and here I immediately fall out with the incumbent DA, who announces that:
For the ends of being and ideal grace.
06/12/1974
No matter what she does, she cannot escape.
Instead of seeing it as an invasion of privacy, kids who have nothing to hide, hide nothing. Also, think of it this way:
Concerning Character: Paige's introspectiveness, her self-doubt, will be immediately recognizable and relatable to many readers. By the same token, her stubbornness and willingness to try to be herself were inspiring, and the results hopeful and satisfying. Paige's parents are fleshed out as people, not just cardboard cutouts, and the artist grandma was a cute idea for a mentor, although in some ways her advice seemed a bit convenient. Paige's friends were all appealing and quirky, from her best friend Diana back in Virginia to her diverse and motley group of comic-reading, music-loving new friends in NYC. And how much do I love the fact that they're self-described ethnic mutts?
I shot these images, mostly from the window of a moving car, earlier this year while I was working for the Northern Uganda Transition Initiative (NUTI), a USAID program, all over northern Uganda. Since shooting them, however, I’ve been a little overwhelmed by work and never got round to really using them for any purpose. However if I explain why I took them, that might allow readers to make up their own purpose.
Na Nothing Gets Clear Without Me Signing My Name
Towards the world.
Never thought I’d ever miss living in Wagga, well apart from the fun times that were had and the awesome people who I miss and the divine baked goods at Bernard’s stall “So French, So Fresh”. If you visit, buy lots of pastries, try them all! So reading this made me smile…
This is the window on the right. I always have a hard time taking a decent photo of these windows. Didn't even try the big main window. Some time I'd like to go by there at night and see what would happen with all the glare and such.
Get yourself some wine and prop yourself up in bed. Or beer and an armchair. Or Gatorade and a rocky outcrop. Whatever makes you feel nice. I have been transmogrified from the latent, non analytical theatre goer that you used to know into a THEATRE ANALYSING MACHINE. All caps.
The Democrats raised the national minimum wage from $6.55 to $7.25. They claim that the additional earnings will help the economy. Just like their stimulus did (right?).
1. Red and While - sew a couple of rows together
Two chairs, the recliner and the platform rocker are at rest against the back drop of a huge window now. That was wasted space for a long time till I finally had the treadmill removed to this room where I am now.
In the summer they offer a picnic lunch amongst the vines. It is a really special feeling to be drinking the wine that is growing all around you. It is a relaxed, informal dining experience (in a really good way). You order your drinks and then get a list of the foods available. You trick the boxes next to what you would like to order and then give it back to the very capable waiting staff. Sit back relax, enjoy your drink and the beautiful surroundings while your picnic is freshly prepared for you.
I snapped this quick photo with my phone in the big middle of flinging tea. Yes, the fabric covers my dining table. It took me all afternoon to get this thing dyed, it was so big. Then, I only gave it a quick ironing and laid it out over the sewing machine desk to finish drying. I usually iron my fabric completely dry but I'd had enough of wrestling fabric for the day! It got a good ironing after work today.
Hopes
After making all of this stuff in 1 day, I worked up quite the appetite. Luckily my neighborhood back home in Philly is home to a wonderful bakery called Bredenbeck's, which has been around since 1889! I picked up a box of petit fours, brewed a pot of mint melange, and threw on my "Tea Party jams". It was a good day.
So here's to my Watermelon Seeds!
Stevens, David - WHITE FOR DANGER
Accompanies my soul as
And until, at last perfected, we bear witness
"I do not choose to argue a point which cannot be proved, but which is tacitly agreed upon. I will continue."
I paid a visit to the synagogue and I left there feeling blame
And I chatted to someone about picture book text, which was curious.
Today I started a new journal. Before I wrote in it, I got to thinking about what might be written on the pages a few months from now. Will I be writing about more failed treatment cycles? Will I lose those 10 lbs that I want to? Will David and I have taken a fun trip for our 6 year wedding anniversary? Will I write the words "I can't believe I'm pregnant..."?
"The governor's focus is working to ensure wrongful convictions don't happen in the first place," Castle said, "like supporting the law school innocence project, creating expert attorneys who specialize in post conviction death penalty cases and encouraging the creation of more public defender offices across the state to ensure competent counsel by attorneys who specialize in death penalty cases."
Sing for the laughter, sing for the tears
Another plus to this activity is that the child creates a pictograph at the end. Sophie immediately identified it as a pictograph when questioned, because we've been talking about them all week.
2-4 chicken breasts
In the meantime, there is a retired bookbinder that works sporadically at my work repairing books from our library. When we get back from our vacation in the States I'll be hitting him up to see if I can help him once a week. At least it will keep my hands busy while I'm trying to find a permanent solution.
It makes me wonder about the mind-set prevalent within the US Armed Forces, when any trained soldiers would not be aware of the consequences of such an action. No matter what strength of suspicion about the level of involvement of the detainees with the Taliban, the burning of Korans is a gratuitous act of insane provocation which can only suggest that those responsible are seriously dehumanised. They are not the actions of troops who are fighting to defend the ideals of the American republic throughout the world, but rather of arrogant, imperial occupiers, who could best be compared to the Roman legionaries who played dice at the foot of the cross of Jesus of Nazareth, whom most of them regard as their Saviour and God.
Okay, back to the part on the Differentiated Instruction. At one time I was so scared of the word "differentiated".
I dont do drugs either and I'd very much like you not to believe so, *** probably looked "stoned" to you cause she was CRYING.
Cool the cake in the pan for 15 minutes, then unmold onto a rack to cool.
The cough and loss of breath affect my lungs
Take care and I will post some pictures over the weekend,
From His own fulness all He takes away. (Be Still My Soul, Catharine von Schlegel)
Clearly this one is not a bar. But I can't just call it an oat 'cake' either, because that's something else as well! I wondered whether oat 'slices' could work, seeing as you cut a cake into slices - but putting it together with 'oat' still somehow makes it sound like a bar.
The things my protagonist wants change depending what I throw at her. And yet all the other characters in the book DO have things they want badly --every one of them! Why can't I think of what she wants? Arrgh.
And that’s why actually, I started to enjoy Art GCSE towards the end. You know, just a bit. I mean, nothing major. I’m not, like, gushing over it or anything…
Talking about the killed industries, Mahir Erkan mentioned music industry. Actually it was not killed, but the way music in now distributed and ways of earning money changed. Today albums may be downloaded from internet for payment.
The year 2011 is now over, and I ended the year on a good note, with a letter to the editor in my local paper. The link won’t last long but I’ll reproduce my piece here:
When you have finished stitching, you'll have a cone shape like the one above.
A painter who came highly recommended was hired to transform the cabinets with a few coats of creamy white paint. A piece of granite to match the existing counters was located for the peninsula top. Beautiful beveled subway tile was chosen for the back splash. The statement light fixture was ordered. The groundwork laid, a few additional details needed to be selected which I wrote about here. The project began in November and was mostly finished in time for a December family holiday party!
So I was examined, blood was taken, and we had a useless quickie ultrasound to check the babies heart beat (which was already found by the nurse with a Doppler-- oh yes, and since I can feel baby moving I knew baby was alive anyway). I was not having contractions. The bleeding had pretty much stopped by the time the Doctor took a look. He scoffed at me having a Midwife, which I was mentally prepared for, but really it did irritate me. He even went so far as to tell me that my Reproductive OB would be -- in his own words -- "offended that you chose to use a lay midwife after he let you go from his care." Ugh. Whatever. Obviously if I need a higher level of care for this pregnancy than a midwife can provide I'll have a regular Ob/Gyn. But that has yet to be determined.
The King drives a bus at the beach.
The type of house I'm most attracted to personally, is a smaller home. Who doesn't love a charming little cottage? Or a studio apartment in New York City? Our house right now is only about 1200 square feet.
the rest on my shoulder down the sandy path to the Grahams’ house. Sweet
“Now pay back the tax money and have a nice day.”
Last Friday, Trisha, Emily and I ate out at Big Mamou-great Cajun food! Em is a rather shy young woman who giggles easily, while Trisha and I are old hands at hanging out, telling stories and laughing over a good meal and a drink. It rained when we arrived, then the sun blasted out. We giggled a lot and had a great time. I like nothing more than enjoying a good meal and drinks with good friends!
I think the trifecta of good looking skin ( outside of avoiding stress and exhaustion hahaha! ) is:
I am not even kidding you. Every stinkin' bit of plumbing-related equipment in our house is having issues. It's lots of fun. Especially for the checkbook. And occasionally the plunger. To put it in perspective - take your mortgage, multiply it by three, and you'll get an idea of how much richer our local plumber is. Oy.
I'm sure you've all heard about the many beauty sample services on the market these days.
Though young, the people insisted that he should be placed as the Mayor, instead of that old rubbish vice Mayor called Zigger, when Mayor Lor was in his death bed. Aside from being tall, dark and handsome, he’s also kind, just and responsible. He was known for having a huge scar in his left hand. But he never told anyone where did he get it.
The arrests were made on Tuesday, and 20 plasma television sets were recovered.
A poignant scene in the book was the death of Rue, the 12-year-old girl from District 11 who reminds Katniss of her little sister. The two girls had temporarily teamed up, and Katniss found Rue trapped in a net. She didn’t get to her on time; she was pierced by a spear. In the book, Katniss shoots Rue’s killer partly out of revenge, partly out of self defense, and later realizes that was her first intentional kill. In the movie, she gets Rue out of the net and then sees her attacker; she shoots defending Rue, but the spear still pierces Rue. She holds Rue in her arms as she dies, singing her a lullaby she remembers her father singing.
2) What do you think research brings to people with disabilities?
Houston police arrest 19,000 people a year for public intoxication, racking up $4 million to $6 million in jail costs. A sobering center aims to divert drunks from jail and free up cells for more dangerous offenders. Dropping off a person at the center, instead of booking him into jail, also would let officers to return to patrol more quickly.
It’s made worse because (I know everyone says this about their siblings, but this is backed up with legitimate testing) she has an extremely high level of intelligence. She’s smart. Very smart. She is working in mathematics three or four years above her grade. She can understand and manipulate concepts that I, at 22 with university education, can’t quite grasp. She’s also beautiful in that sort of nordic-maiden way. Tall and graceful and blue eyed and blonde haired. Of all the people in the world, she does not need these image and identity issues, and certainly not at the age of 13!
Without oppress of toll;
but of course...this fun journey would not have been possible without the King of Distress...Tim Holtz...our cool "Professor"...he's a great teacher...full of inspiration with a great knowledge of the products he loves...his extraordinary talent and great sense of fun guided us all step-by-step through the Creative Chemistry 101 Online Class...can't wait for the next one and remember it's all about enjoying the journey and learning to...
Cats worldwide are preparing for battle against the Alvah Consciousness.
Heat a large pot or Dutch oven over medium-high heat. Then add 2 to 3 tablespoons of olive oil (or you can do a butter/olive oil split).
Of course, I’m just picking up a little knowledge about it now, but in an organized fashion at least. In this series of posts, we are now following the sound of the guns, at least for the major battles.
P.S. I enjoyed Ricky Gervais' performance in "Ghost Town," but found him pretty boring in this one, despite his having given himself a couple of emotional scenes to work in. (He cowrote the screenplay.)
1433 **D-VIII/29/2002. “The Accidental Leo Strauss.” “New Studies on Leo Strauss” Panel, Claremont Institute for the Study of Statesmanship and Political Philosophy (with William Kristol, Steven Lenzner, and others), Annual Convention, American Political Science Association, Boston, Massachusetts. (Incorporated in Item C-2003(2), above, pp. 780-82.)
HOW THE FUCK DO YOU FUCK UP SOMETHING THAT IMPORTANT, THAT FUCKING EPIC, THAT FUCKING CLIMACTIC – THE GODDAMN FUCKING CLIMAX OF THE ENTIRE FUCKING SHOW – THAT FUCKING HARD??
I don't if any of you are basketball fans or not, but in a house of 6 boys and 1 girl (that girl being me), I am exposed to a lot more basketball that I would otherwise watch (zero). And because of that, our household is OBSESSED with Jimmer Fredette at the moment (and my husband is the ring leader of the obsession!)
I don't understand what is happening here. What does until he stumbles into the one field that might actually help others before the police arrive: social worker. mean?
I'm a huge fan of the series, which starred Gregory Harrison, Heather Menzies and Donald Moffat, and am very excited by this news. With this much-desired and highly-anticipated video release, I'll now have virtually all of my favorite childhood shows on my DVD shelves.
To "top it off", I added a large pearl brad to the centre of the lid.
SO you wanna burn the Koran UMMMM!
14.The Staircase (Mystery)
I blinked. “Max as in my brother Max?” I was quite confused.
Mother: Why not?
So it took a while. I ordered our new oil-rubbed bronze beauties from an online source called Your Home Supply. A sweet reader recommend them and their prices were pretty fantastic. Almost half of what I found at hardware stores.
Although the contrast in style and audience is vast, the pieces are similar in really catering to their audiences. They know who reads their magazines, and they don’t fail to deliver. Neither of these magazines is a “sports magazine,” yet they bring the topic into their world in a manner familiar to their readers. They even utilize similar tropes and rituals to do so; they just use them slightly different, showing just how diverse writing can be.
2 TBSP hoisin sauce
11. Spazz - B-Street Butta
Since I've been on a chalkboard kick lately, I thought I would share my latest transformation with you.
Applicant, who suffers from mild paralysis of the lower body, has been in prison since 1992. In 2003, he was transferred to a different facility where he was supposed to be put in a ward that could cope with his condition, but he was put in an “ordinary” unit. His transfer into the new unit meant that he could not access the toilets or use any physiotherapy facilities. His request to for a sentence deferral was rejected in 2005. While the prison opened a new ward that could have addressed his condition, due to overcrowding he was not moved there. After this point he was in and out of detention in a hospital facility due to the conditions in the prison. Based on these facts the Court found a violation of Article 3 prohibiting inhuman or degrading treatment.
Matchbook is like when the hipster decided preppy and girly was cool and maybe got married (or is about to get married or maybe will be a single gal forever and that's cool too!) and had a bunch of hipster but preppy kids and now it's time to decorate and throw a party. Yay! So super fun, and HELLO Jonathan Adler is on the cover so sign me up.
Bake the brownies about 25 minutes, until a toothpick inserted into the center comes out almost clean with a few moist crumbs attached to it. Let the brownies cool directly in the pan on a baking rack, then use the foil overhang to lift the brownies out. You can cut these into whatever size you like, but I suggest doing three lengthwise cuts, then three crosswise cuts to make 16 brownies. If you have the self-control to not gobble up these freshly baked brownies immediately, these can be made 2 days ahead if stored in an airtight container at room temperature.
Rumors of fatalities and we have no idea
SO for the last year or so only 2 out of 4 burners have worked on the stove. I am resourceful. 2 is better than zero, so it has not bothered me. The wife feels differently. She likes to fix sh!t. I don't like to like to fix things, I like to ignore broken things, make pigs, drink coffee, try another variation on pizza recipes, like that.
Several months ago, a friend of mine asked whatever happened to that paranormal historical that finaled in the Brava contest a year ago.
So I still watch sometimes. I cover my eyes when Alan’s on the screen because he’s … gross and sad. But I like Walden and Zoey (said British girlfriend as played by Sophie Winkelman).
1 tsp. oregano
This 5-part series is about how I would correct/fix various design issues within the Toronto Transit Commission (TTC). This is not about how I would change bus routes, or how one mode is better or worse than another mode (i.e., LRT vs. Subway). This is about how I believe the TTC (and other transit authorities) can improve the experience of engaging and interacting with it’s ridership (actual and potential). Here is part four.
* Spellbinders Nestabilities: Picot Edge Circles
not surprisingly, MOST of our taxes are going to the military. the bank bailouts are included under "government". check it out:
I would love to hear from anyone who has moved across the country or a long distance, please feel free to provide me with any tips or tricks that you have learned along the way. I have lived in Northern California my whole life and have moved only short distances before, this will be my first long distance move. We will also be driving the 2,700 miles across country with our two Cocker Spaniels, so if you have any traveling tips please let me know.
By DEB GRUVER As homeowners hit by the EF-3 tornado that twisted and turned along I-135 begin to rebuild, Sedgwick County officials are thinking about how far to go to help them do so.
For the past few days, I had been craving nachos. A big plate of tortilla chips with ground "beef," olives and ooey-gooey cheeze with salsa and sour cream on the side. Luckily, I had everything I needed to make it in the house. Well, almost everything...I would have loved some guacamole. Maybe next time.
Side note: People sometime ask us how we have 2
“Velocity Micro has always had a cutting edge product lineup, frequently offering Intel’s latest processors to their enthusiast customers on launch day,” said CJ Bruno, Intel VP, GM Intel Americas. “We’re excited that Velocity Micro has continued that tradition by making the 3rd Gen Intel Core processors available in their industry-leading performance desktop offerings.”
If you have a few minutes, check out the 2011 Five in the Next Five Years videos on YouTube (links below). But, if you don’t have time to watch them right now, I have noted a key point from each:
24. My mother taught me: WISDOM …
Thanks a WindMillion
THAT is the task at hand. Maintaining excellence where we currently earn medals, while improving in events where we know we have the ability to be competitive. To that end we need a plan, a road map if you will, of how we are going to get there. Putting that road map together is the role of USATF. I would hope any such plan might include putting our most promising athletes together with our best coaches by area of expertise. At least I think that would be the place to start. Luckily we have another year before the next championship (Daegu, 2011) and two years until the next Olympics (London, 2012). So there is plenty of time to put something workable in place.
There comes a point where you hit an obstacle that tries to destroy what you believe in. This is one of them. On one hand, I realize what all is going in my life can be considered crazy to some; but after some of the things I’ve seen and heard– this is tame. But even though I acknowledge that these things that are happening are not of my doing (or my current life– none of this was or is mine), my mind cannot help but whisper
50. 1/2 WAY THERE!!
I know this blogger personally. She is a precious soul. And her heart is just like His.
Roodt writes that he wanted her to repeat her astonishing story in front of his video camera in exactly that same casual, humorous and resigned manner she had told it the first time.
But should I do that? I mean, I have been put under fire by someone that does not matter to me, but I wonder if she isn’t just expressing some of the thoughts a lot of people around me are thinking, but do not say it aloud.
3/4 cup butter
That stroke of luck or disaster is the time when our energy savings get liquidated. ES turns into Visible Result (VR), so the more we receive luck, our saving will also decrease. Thus, if we want to have lots of luck (or “unexpected help in the right time and right place”), we must do more good things in life!
“Not all those who wander are lost.”
Looks like the cold weather early in April wasn’t kind to the peach and plum blossoms, so it will probably be a limited crop for them this year, if anything. The asian pears, apples and cherry trees are flowering nicely right now. Two of the apples Arkansas Black and Evereste have lots of nice flowers. Four of the asian pears (Chojuro, Ichiban, Hosui and Shinko) have between 6 and a 100+ blossoms each. Not bad for being only a year in the ground. We’ll see how many they try and set. Asian pears tend to try and over-bear. I’ll probably prune off the fruit down to no more than a dozen for each tree. The NY518 yellow cherry is the big winner for flowering this year, followed by Vandalay and then Stella. The Surefire cherry may not flower this year, but it is just getting started breaking dormancy. Surefire is really late in the season to flower compared to most cherries.
TWO MORE BLOGGERS WRITE BOOKS:
"Four elderly gentleman, the entire membership of the Chowder Society, get together periodically to share ghost stories. These gents have been doing this for a long time there is a sinister reason why. We don't learn until well into the film what that reason is, and the leading up to it is the meat of the story. Set against a wonderfully atmospheric New England backdrop, it is revealed that the distinguished membership of the Chowder Society had accidentally murdered a young girl they were all smitten with 50 years earlier. The girl, brilliantly played by the enigmatic Alice Krige, has come back in the form of a ghost to exact terrible revenge."
But, as a man with fiscal responsibilities, I have to look at the ROI of something like a convention or conference.
Please continue to look after us!! ♥
It was another unseasonably beautiful day that evening, and after the session we held hands and walked through a park. We went for dinner together, and then back to the park where we sat on a bench and talked. We spent 4 1/2 hours together. I returned home alone and without resolution, but I allowed myself some hope.
Country: England
The battle is not over, the war wages on. Is the enemy done with me? I doubt it. He is forever seeking to destroy my faith. What is different? I am equppied now to fight the battle with truth that sets me free. I know what to look for, I know how the enemy develops strongholds, and I know how to stop it. I can say with all authority under heaven, in the name of Christ Jesus, I have been healed and made whole. I am free.
As one of our offspring has a tear-soaked, red-cheeked moment that may or may not involve hysterics, she and I will knowingly look at each other.
plus, i've got something HUGE weighing on my heart & i need to let it out.
Next, BBQ shrimp. No photo cuz we both ate it too quickly. Did I mention that it was wrapped in bacon? Double yum.
Let's start with memory lane....the 'Before' shots.
Oh well, the people who are alleged to have killed the police officer in Glenview are still rotting in prison. The police officers who were seen killing Luxmore, namely; Motion Jakopo (41), Simon Mafunda (32), Michael Makwalo (30), Lee Makope (23), Benedict Tapfuma (22) and Blessing Saidi (26) and injuring 11 other people have been released on $50 bail. Where is the justice in that? Are police officers more important than ordinary civilians, hence making their murder more critical and their alleged criminals guiltier than those who kill ordinary people? Is the known crime of police officers, who clearly ill-treated citizens to whom they owe a constitutional mandate to protect, a less serious offence than that of rowdy citizens who allegedly attacked a police officer?
I have pretty much set up the plot already, but a probe is flying through space, constantly blaring out a whale song message while disabling ay ship it comes across. When it reaches Earth and gets no answer from whales, it blots out the sun and begins boiling the oceans. I hate it when call and no one’s home, too, but geez, I do not burn their house down in anger. The probe’s actions are necessary to have a conflict in the movie, but think about the message it sends; it does not matter if we preserve endangered species, because at some point, an alien probe is going to come destroy the environment anyway.
I love blogging it is the place where I can organise my thoughts and turn them into expressible opinions. I am very clear that my primary purpose in blogging is to inform myself, if other people derive some benefit from my blogs it is a happy side effect. At this point I should perhaps thank those of you who have been kind enough to comment kindly on my blogs, actually I suppose I should thank every one who has commented regardless. As I have admitted recently I use blogging as a tool to recognise my own thought processes as much of the time they are amorphous and only become concrete to me when observed from the third person position. Also the process of blogging frequently stimulates recall – I have a great memory but patchy recall.
When you find yourself in the middle of one of lifes many storms, who do you want in the boat with you?? You want the people that have your back..always. You need a person who will smack you around when you screw up as well as smack around other people when they try and take you down.
Thorn laughed. “Detective, they’re just symbols.”
They were once kids.
DOWNLOAD (Uploaded.to)
Hands down if I did not have Eddie to look at everything rationally not emotionally. Eddie always looked at we had to do what was best to get one of our little girls home. Though we would have with out a doubt taken both of them.
Fresh plums from the Santa Monica Farmers' Market...
So when Obama says (as he did just a few nights ago, while “slow-jamming” the news with Jimmy Fallon) that those on the right want to pay back the national debt only as long as it doesn’t include taxing billionaires, remember that it was Obama who put his signature to a bill that cost the country nearly 900 billion dollars for the sake of easing the burden on the nation’s wealthiest.
And, for those who have only recently joined the free-for-all that is this outpouring of angst, drivel and complete sideways thinking at times, my dearest Dad, who was far from perfect but as mentioned above DID actually act like he loved all my presents (even the lame old hankies and Soap-On-A-Rope my brother and I gave him one year), died in January.
“I could take it from you,” said the Queen. “The girl will not be difficult to dispose of, and as for you, Daylighter, those who serve me serve with their lives. A suicide rush could greatly inconvenience you, despite your curse.” She ran her eyes over him lingeringly.
The next morning, I felt better and headed off to work as usual. When I used the restroom, I noticed some spotting on the toilet paper, and called my OB just to be safe. She wanted me to come in...just as a precaution. Worried, but just expecting to be told to rest and drink more water, J and I went in around 11 a.m. I knew as soon as she examined me that things were just not right. I was dilated 1 - 2 cm and just like that my perfect pregnancy was gone. I knew it was bad. I knew that the chances of a 23 week old baby making it were slim to none.
The Slight Edge is that little something that makes one person successful where another one isn’t.
Basically, I want to blog to develop my writing skills and to share my ideas, thoughts, photography and everything that comes into my mind.
We're cruising I-90 near the Idaho/Washington border, heading towards route 95 (which hits the 90 at Coeur D'Alene), at plus 7.
Why the change and things for you to consider
Amazingly, the letter actually proves that the USDA was fully aware of the situation. In order to fully understand the intricate details of this event, it is first important to understand a few key factors regarding alfalfa and its connection to the entire food supply.
Or, smiling proudly, toss down gages….
I wonder if you are still met with ridicule and the names of our gods besmirched before you in public. I wonder if you still hesitate as do I, to disagree.
The enormous Sudcrawler lumbers off toward the
Thanks to so many similarities between the agencies (let's face it: after 20 years everyone eventually settles in to a similar set of procedures for doing the same work) I've never had trouble adapting to a new job. The longest was about 5 weeks at the aforementioned 500+ employee agency. I absolutely hated it during those initial weeks and then everything started to click. It was the peak of my career in so many ways.
Every time Dad has come to visit & Lenny was in the barn or near where we were, he'd just smile. Smile & remember that little runt calf sucking on his finger. As he aged, Lenny's disposition remained wonderful! He was never a bull to be mean or aggressive. In fact, we never left him with the other bulls because they'd pick on him. Even the little bulls would pick on him. Lenny sired Ultimate & Freedom, many more & just a week ago Lacey (my pet cow) had a Lenny Bull Calf.
YES I have looked online. NO I don't want to use a bunch of spices or onions or sausage or other types of mushroom. I just want the chanterelle flavor to be LOUDER.
A. Most of my books are biographies, so my process begins with figuring out who to write about. Since Gary also writes biography, this is something we talk about a lot!
ZNY CCCCC ZZH
Garnets –Jerusalem –early pre- Indian Uprising single.
Individual tickets are $10 and include access to the Children's Festival FUN ZONE.
Roland Systems Group U.S.
SB 10.88.29: The Supreme Lord said: My dear son of Sakuni, you appear tired. Why have you come such a great distance? Please rest for a minute. After all, it is one’s body that fulfills all one’s desires.
Luigi had nothing to say about the elephant and whale machines. It was well known that the tiger machine was the most difficult to operate in the entire factory. Why, the elephant and whale machines almost operated themselves. It took no skill whatsoever to keep them popping out respectable elephants and whales.
Yet, what these countries have piously demanded at a global level – heterogeneity, diversity and tolerance of other – they are increasingly moving away from, and in fact are actively clamping down on, at a national level.
Am I just a ticking time bomb
So I do my best to focus on what I can control.
When the Coffins moved again in 1809, this time to Philadelphia. James Mott, a fellow teacher at Nine Partners, settled there too, taking a position in Thomas Coffin’s hardware business. On Apr. 10, 1811, he & Lucretia were married in the Pine Street Meetinghouse. They made a striking couple: he a tall, blond, kindly appearing man, dignified in demeanor & deliberate in speech; she a diminutive brunette with a high, broad forehead, intense, burning eyes, a vivacious manner, & a tart tongue (her schoolmates on Nantucket had caller her a “spitfire,” & that irrepressible trait still occasionally broke through the Quaker sweetness & serenity with which in later life it was overlaid). Despite differences in temperament, however, a complete harmony of interest subsisted between them throughout the 57 years of their married life. James Mott shared all his wife’s convictions, supported her in all her unpopular causes, &, by accompanying her on speaking tours, lent he public appearances a respectability which other feminist lectures lacked. Six children were born to them between 1812 - 1828: Anna, Thomas (who died in infancy), Maria, a second Thomas, Elizabeth, & Martha.
Ad humor. /Rimshot.
But I'll also work a little bit harder to find those impressionable moments and grasp on tight. To set the laundry down long enough to look into a little one's shining eyes while they tell of an adventure or to give a shoulder to a teenager who is struggling to find a way to explain how they are feeling. To laugh and smile and visit more.
It’s clear that despite how she’s saying the word, she MEANS Obama, and I do NOT get into political discussions with random folks, whether I share an opinion or not. I personally believe ANY career politician is a bag of monkey waste covered in toxic sludge, but I don’t bother explaining that to most folks, because most people pick a side and love it to death.
Playing poker games is the amusement, which is enjoyable by person of all era. At today’s present time it has become a passion to play online poker and the peoples are slowly but surely showing their preference towards this game. If you love taking risks and adventure; thus playing Poker Online is just perfect for you.
Each Friday on the Timeless Daydreams forum we've been posting a weekly challenge. We decided to start posting them on the blog as well. If you participate, please consider signing up on the forum and uploading your work in the gallery. We leave lots of love in there. :)
And really none of these things are terrible
FACE
Tomorrow! He shouted. But by then she was already through the fence and down the lane.
So, Cezanne then. After reading a little bit of the bio of the painter himself I had to write down a brief description of one of his paintings, seen below, and I wrote down things like "crude", "bright colours" and "not much detail". Turns out I was more or less right on the money. Critics used more technical terms than me but I had the right idea. I'm not thrilled by the subject or considering changing courses or anything but so far I'm finding it easier than I expected. Roll on the rest of the chapter!
'Yes, but you really MEANT it,' said I, regaining a little bit more Strop.
Patti avoided parties, lived a suburban lifestyle, had no burning jealousies to drive her, and performed with the genial ease and gentle beauty that didn't set flashbulbs popping or make the front page of the pin-up magazines.
There are many areas of my life that I tend to try to manage on my own, forgetting that all I do should be for God and His Kingdom. This causes my priorities to get out of whack, and boatloads of stress. What about you? What areas of your life do you need to give over to Christ today, so you can live fully in His Kingdom?
We came home and played online for a while, but just felt like going to bed early. Around 11 pm, we curled up togeter and watched a movie. Mom said I must have been exhausted, because I fell asleep and snored! *rolls eyes* I wonder how she would like it if I told her when SHE snores!!
You know fall is here in my neck of the when the orange and black Sweetzle cookie boxes start taking over the end caps in the grocery store.
So, I see this book becoming almost interactive when paired with the LIVE scenario of a facebook group!
Please do not keep this to yourself.
Can any "ethical" "professional" journalist contradict himself and make such a fool of himself in public? Have these people no self-respect or respect for the thousands upon thousands of people raped and murdered since their Governments helped put the ANC in power? Or are they just too shy to admit that they had funded and supported a murderous ruthless terrorist organisation?
Writing is something I feel I must do. It is the only thing I feel I “must” do. I trust that it is by design of some great positive energy beyond me because, no matter what, I always wind up writing about it.
3. “gypsy naked woman”
Marge Bailey, founder of DriverFinder.net states, “Depending on what resources a company engages to advertise, i.e.; the size of their budget, what their orientation costs are and cost to get a driver to orientation, a new ‘experienced’ hire can range from $3500.00 to over $5,000.00 each.”
I'm not sure what changed my mind with these. Part of it was that I was wanting a pair of straight-legs with a more interesting wash than my Joe's jeans, and part of it was that I just really liked the cut of these. And get this: while the model looked pretty good in the photos, and I could tell there was no posterior flattening action going on, I figured these jeans would actually look better on me because my butt is rounder than hers. And I was right! Take that, twiggy!
Opening Day is May 12th but if your a Gulf Island Waterpark Season Pass Member, you can visit May 5th for their preview day. Gulf Island Waterpark has plenty of ride for the children and a full calendar of special events. This summer your child can meet ROCKY (ZENDAYA COLEMAN) FROM DISNEY CHANNEL’S SHAKE-IT-UP, MEET GIBBY (NOAH MUNCK) FROM NICKELODEON’S iCARLEY, attend KIDZ PALOOZA WITH SPONGEBOB SQUAREPANTS, and other fun-filled events for the whole family.
In the week long schedule we were given they made sure to allow for plenty of free sightseeing time....which we took full advantage of!! We got to see more than I ever imagined in that week, even with having two of the days in France spent out on the coast.
It’s fair to say that this beer split the crowd and, to be fair, that is not a situation peculiar to Myrniong. The match with the dessert was close to perfect for me and it seems by the licked clean plates that I was not the only one in that boat.
The more appropriate line of inquiry would be to ask why the chain of command didn’t use the power they had to ensure that Gottlieb, et al., conducted a thorough investigation, instead of leaving the holes outlined above.
The recipe comes from the May 2010 issue of Country Style, compliments of country chef David Swain.
What’s their connection?
Professional Tip
I missed my train last year thanks to the bottle of BOOBs chardonnay I drank on Saturday night. Maria has promised me that won't happen this year. I love to talk to others, but sometimes need a bit of warming up to get to my normal self. I am terrible at inviting myself along with a group because I don't want to feel like a burden. I am ready for a weekend of drinking a little too much, laughing until my face and abs hurt, and running on little to no sleep! WHO'S WITH ME?!
This pattern is an adapted version of shawl 7b in Beehive Knitting Booklets No. 9, A Practical Guide to Knitting and Crochet c. 1915. It has been tweaked to no longer be a full circle and written more simply.
No, mothers baked their finest to show off their culinary skills. There would be pies galore. Ms. Elta’s three layer German Chocolate Cake was a legendary standard, much-anticipated each year. There would always be at least one large coconut cake with seven-minute frosting (no canned frosting!). If there were cookies or brownies, they were definitely homemade and piled high, as befits a prize.
There's a pair of Newark players you should keep in mind. Tim Raines Jr. and Todd Gossage, the offspring of two former MLB greats, will be playing for the Bears this season. Todd will be twenty-seven years old this season. Tim Raines Jr. will be thirty-two in August.
1. Be There
On the other side of the Square are two antique stores. The one that’s a little lower than the road, the last time I was in there, it seemed to be full of old farm tools and things that I wasn’t into, but I will say that it’s been years since I’ve been inside. I shall have to visit, and see if they’ve changed, though it still is a fascinating looking building, I think. The other antique store used to be a gas (fuel, petrol) station, as you’ll see from their funky layout. It gets even better, inside, because the back rooms are what used to be the garage, and it still has speed bumps on the ground. I always thought the building was just plain fun, along with the antiques being attractive and desirable. Yes, I do like antiques, but they’re usually beyond my wallet. : )
May God give us the grace.
Jaime’s Cryin
One thing I find interesting is that Protestants are more in favour of the death penalty than Catholics. I doubt many European Protestant are in favour, so why the difference?
This year the Telegraph newspaper is making its 22nd annual Christmas Charity Appeal on behalf of three charities.
Hopefully Congress will get a clue from the protests against SOPA and PIPA and drop them. If they don't, the people need to remind them when election time comes around again.
If you're concerned that it doesn’t seem to be working, please feel free to give the sweet folks at Compendium a call at (800) 914-3327.
Soon Kwon, Managing Director, LGEIL, said, “Technology and design are key factors behind LG Home Entertainment products. With our 2012 CINEMA 3D Smart TV lineup, we have been able to take a significant step forward, thanks to a series of new and upgraded 3D features led by the CINEMA SCREEN Design.”
If you are using BPM (or SOA) and you are not using any of the B2B functionality, then you might want to consider disabling B2B on your SOA managed servers. There are a few good reasons for doing this:
6/2 Houston, TX - Free Press SummerFest
to grief's lure. I'm here; close your eyes,
Myth #1: If you write a book you love, that you believe in (or an entire series) - it will sell thousands of copies. It turns out readers rarely “stumble” onto a good book. Normally someone has to point them to it. I had published nearly the entire Destiny Series before I realized I needed to find readers. I’m not necessarily a social butterfly so it was hard in the beginning. What I looked for instead of readers were new friends. People that enjoyed the same type of books that I did that I could chat with about great books I had read. If I found a book I LOVED, I contacted the author to tell them how great their book was and asked for advice for everything from cover design to book pirating. Books won’t sell
Necklace: Classic Literature : Yummy
Anyway... I also thought I'd throw in a couple videos. The first is a clip Chris got a couple weeks ago of Ryann reading. The second is a little song thing that Ryann started saying to us the other night. She told us Miss Julie says it to her, which is her teacher at school. It was just too cute the first time she did it. She is saying "Round and round goes the teddy bear. One step. Two step. Tickle under there!"
*There will be one or more posts per week interspersed with other projects I have in the works.
By the way: OOPS! 5 gal. was TOO much! Don't buy the 5 gal. unless you're planning on splitting it with friends or family. Thankfully we found one family so far.
I hope that is not going to be voted by the Greeks , the far-right (Neonazi) party.
All you have to do to enter is post a comment below with the title of a book I reviewed that you read and if you enjoyed it, OR post a link to my blog on Facebook and comment below "FB." The deadline is Dec. 9th and the winner will be selected at random. Good luck!
Patellofemoral pain syndrome is pain in the front of the knee. It frequently occurs in teenagers, manual laborers, and athletes. It sometimes is caused by wearing down, roughening, or softening of the cartilage under the kneecap.
Here’s a good article by Chris Brauns on sensing and responding to your call to ministry. While some of the strategies don’t match up exactly with how we pursue our call in the UMC, there’s still much wisdom here to glean.
In 1973 the man applied for and was offered a good job where he could use his skills and interests. He gave notice at the place where he had worked since 1968. When he showed up for the new job, he was told that the owner's nephew had been hired instead. Man was out of work for nine months, collecting unemployment and applying everywhere.
- I just want to be liked SADFACE :-( No, I write because I enjoy it and hope one day to do it on a semi-professional basis.
Conservatism and cognitive ability are negatively correlated. The evidence is based on 1254 community college students and 1600 foreign students seeking entry to United States' universities. At the individual level of analysis, conservatism scores correlate negatively with SAT, Vocabulary, and Analogy test scores. At the national level of analysis, conservatism scores correlate negatively with measures of education (e.g., gross enrollment at primary, secondary, and tertiary levels) and performance on mathematics and reading assessments from the PISA (Programme for International Student Assessment) project. They also correlate with components of the Failed States Index and several other measures of economic and political development of nations. Conservatism scores have higher correlations with economic and political measures than estimated IQ scores.
Don't you wish you knew all the ins and outs about such things you've never seen before? For one thing, we both had to ask about the holes in the first place. Supposedly they are escape hatches for the bats! Are you kidding me! There are that many bats living inside the walls of these apartments???
Le Bazar Saint Remois
Alright, so, the more comfortable a baby is in the water when they start, the faster they will get through each lesson and the more they would be able to get out of the lessons as a whole. (Well, DUH! That's kind of a given.) So, we decided to try and get Laney a little more comfortable going UNDER the water (And get myself a little more comfortable watching her BE under the water). So, we sat our older children along the side of the pool and then, one at a time, we had them fall off and into the water. They would lean forward, fall in, their heads would go under and then we would scoop them out. Laney sat and watched for a while. Then, it was her turn......
I always love it when a director can immerse me in a film by the way he/she plays on the emotions they want me to feel. Recently I watched ‘I Spit on Your Grave’ (2010 Dir: Steven R. Monroe) http://www.imdb.com/title/tt1242432/ and I was amazed at how my emotions were dragged around. From reading the blurb on the back of the DVD case I know what to expect, so I sat down with my friends ready to back it down and pick holes at it. Surprisingly I didn’t. The one character in the film that I expected to sympathise with the entire time (a simpleton named Matthew) I ended up hating and couldn’t wait for the main protagonist to get her revenge. Normal I would hate the idea of watching a film where three quarters of the film is dedicated to the build up of and the eventual rape of the main protagonist, but I didn’t mind, because it was all necessary to get the emotions of hatred towards the preportraitors of the rape and to feel the encouragement and support for her ultimate revenge.
The candidate will receive basic production training but this is NOT an on-air specific position as most of the tasks will be geared towards project management and admin duties.
Because I do. And though I felt scorned and irritated at you (and at me, for my inability to get such a simple technology to work correctly) I let it go. Because mostly I'm laid back and so I could just shrug my shoulders and move on with my life.
I had to make some fun cards to match using cut outs from one of the sheets of patterned paper:
The Equatorial sun was brilliant and harsh; I once lay directly beneath a large fallen tree trunk, desperate for the tiniest sliver of shade. Insects whirred and bit. The water was filled with all sorts of dangerous things that could burrow into our flesh or bloodstream.
I still hadn't made any soap by myself. We were getting low on soap and I didn't want to use the store bought stuff again. It makes my skin feel funny. The only solution was to bit the bullet and make it all by myself. There is a surprising amount of stuff you need to make soap. There are different oils, pots, blenders, additives if you like, and of course, the dreaded lye. I got it all and even decided to get the fancy wooden mold.
And I'm ready for it.
"Albert Lewis?" The Widow Johnson questioned.
Pours extremely hazed orange-copper, with a fluffy head letting convoluted aromas of rose hips, chamomile, granny smith apple, leather, and burlap sack. Flavors of wet hay, orange blossom water, lemongrass, petals, some wood, and a slice of hop bitterness towards the back – accumulating to a lingering body and light carbonation.
I hope you will have time to join in with our new challenge and visit the Ribbon Girl online store - we're always adding new products and are happy to send tiny samples if you need to match up a colour or lace pattern.
elm crowns floating like green balloons just prior
To call and say "Hi"?
think maybe I've been trying to get back there ever since."
I never did tire of finding and playing all kindsa new and underheard music for you to hear, nor did I get tired of meticulously planning musical segueways or diagramming excursions through styles and genres of music. Having discovered KDVS at an early age, it was very natural of me to enjoy a wide variety of music, and I hope that openness rubbed off on some people.
Gwinnett County is interesting because the residents are now a nonwhite majority, yet it’s still all white Republicans on the council. It’s fairly common for a traditional white power structure to remain when diversity comes in. In Chicago, you had an Irish power structure in neighborhoods long after they became majority black. But yes, one myth is that Asians are Asians when it comes to politics, but each ethnic group is different, politically speaking. And another thing that’s clear is that African-Americans and Hispanics go their separate ways — the immigrants tend not to move into the African-American areas.
Once it has emerged from this impasse, though, French’s narration begins to pick up steam, every page delivering something valuable. One of his most diverting studies is that of nepotism in Indian democracy. As a case study he takes the Lok Sabha or the Indian parliament, home to 545 elected MPs. With the assistance of a team of researchers, French attempts to figure out just how many of them might be considered to be what he called hereditary MPs or “HMPs” – that is, MPs with a strong family, if not directly filial, connection to politics.
PHP 5.4.0 is around the corner, with RC6 released this weekend. With the courtesy of Ondřej Surý it’s already available in experimental.
When she got to the ice, she found a quiet little area, placed her padded stool, and carefully laid out her tools.
You've got two unnamed characters and Gina in the first paragraph. That's too much. Focus on ONE. What's her problem?
January 1-3, 2010 Clip No. 2325
I settle him at 7pm but by 10pm he is crying so we give him a bottle of expressed milk - about 8 or 9 ounces (you can not imagine how my nipples are being tortured by the Medela). By 3am he is awake crying. We have tried cuddling him, rocking him, leaving him to cry but he only thing that works is a quick snuggle up to me and my boobs. No sooner does our head hit the pillow but the duvet gets wafted off again as by 4am he wants a feed. By 5am he is awake again. And by 5.30am he has woken up his sister in the room next door, who complains to us that she can not sleep with "all this noise". By 6.30am its breakfast time.
Here we’ve got two pounds of supermarket ground turkey (try to buy the not so fat-free grade, like the 7 percent fat version — if you buy the 99 percent stuff, hit it with a small dollop of bacon fat or some olive oil in order to prevent it from drying out on the grill) to which we have added our seasoning base, a nice dollop of French mustard, some Kosher salt and fresh ground pepper, a hit of Soy Sauce, and the secret ingredient…
Place into a pre-heated 180 degree oven and bake for approx 40-45 minutes (this will depend on your oven and the size of the vege’s). Cook up some pasta, drain and crumble in some fetta cheese, as much or as little as you like (we like lots!). Stir through the roasted veg and chorizo and serve.
The ray he can play
Some of the titles are:
The most puzzling poster is the one of Sarkozy kissing Frau Merkel. The couple were bosom allies the last time I checked, so why show them kissing? Could Sarko have bribed the fashion house to do it because he wanted to make his wife jealous? A new mother is often so infatuated with her baby that she neglects her husband’s needs. Maybe the poster will prompt Carla to accelerate her programme of coochie exercises so she can wrap her luscious thighs around Sarko the next time he ventures into the marital bed. If he keeps on fantasizing about getting into Frau Merkel's pants it might damage the French national interest. She doesn’t look like the sort of woman who’ll give it away for nothing.
Facebook: Livinsonoro: Musica Baile.
Author Solutions today announced an extended royalty offer for existing and new authors to its DIY e-book publishing platform, Booktango. The offer will continue for new authors signing up with Booktango until July 4th.
I know there is prejudice, because when my daughter was ten (before I started writing for children) I was less than impressed (why? I'm not sure) to see her reading books which looked 'girly' - until I discovered the excellent books by Cathy Cassidy, Karen McCombie and Hilary McKay hiding behind those covers. Recently, a friend of mine complained that her 10-year-old daughter was reading 'terrible' books - she was talking about Cathy Cassidy. Needless to say she had never read any of her books, and I was able to put her right.
Veet hair removal $3/1 - expires 3/31/2011
grabbing a handful of cheerios, and frozen blueberries
The student needs to understand that memorizing is not learning. Neither, for that matter, is abstract intellectualizing. Giving a quiz to make sure that everybody has at least read the assignment works on the reductive, essential level. The only way for a teacher to find out if students are learning is to ask them to apply principles or themes or ideas from a wide range of perspectives to creatively devised hypothetical situations, challenges and prompts.
BeaArthur22: Hi
My Son’s teacher says the same thing happens to her, except it’s “Ummmm….Mom? I mean Mrs…..”
12. Prohibition got a big boost from business -- John Rockefeller, Henry Ford, and other industrialists thought it would mean a clean and sober workforce that they could get to work more like the automatons they wanted -- and government -- because the feds now had the income tax and were rolling in revenue, and thought they didn't need booze tax any more. So did Repeal. When Rockefeller saw that his workers were still drunk, and now were sick from bootleg crap booze, and saw the taxes going to pay for an increasingly corrupt enforcement bureaucracy, he did an about-face. When the Depression hit in 1929, income tax revenues dropped, and the feds needed money to pay for jobs programs -- hey, start up the booze biz again, it's a two-fer!
"I'm not! That's what happened!"
I go Wow. A straight tail Beechcraft Bonanza. (Those are really unusual, you mostly see the V-tails. My first flight instructor had a V-Tail--they were called Doctor/Lawyer killers for a time, but he flew for United so it wasn't going to kill him.)
If you are bored with the typical grilled chicken sandwich that is deemed "healthy", you have to give this pesto recipe a try. The pesto makes the sandwich! I'll explain this in two parts - the pesto first:
Needless to say, all of my efforts to get our patient, my partner, and myself safely to the hospital were achieved. But as for the hundreds of little amphibians in the path of a Paramedic behind the wheel, they met a different fate.
How can you use these insights in a personal experience piece? In a how-to article? In a marriage article? In an article about friendships? In fiction? In a meditation/devotional? In poetry?
Well, here we are. It is 2011. Oh my gosh! It is so hard to believe how fast 2010 went. There were several significant things in my life in 2010.
MPs even accused the police of playing in part in the country's high crime rate.
Wendy -68
Orlando Silveira - orchestrations 9, 10
Vegan Options: Grilled Vegetable & Whole Grain Salad – Seasonal Vegetables and Mixed Greens with Barley, Spelt and a Basil vinaigrette
- a green veggie, such as peas or spinach
Because the thing is, I don't want to be an "adult", whatever the fuck that means. I finally realized that in one of my recent breakdowns (I very rarely meltdown, normally, but in the last couple of months, I've been making a habit of it.) that all I want to do is to be 15 or 16 again (despite the fact I had no clue who I was at those ages, and wasn't necessarily all that happy), and be able to just *be* without all of the pressure. The expectation that I should be moving on to *more*.
In a large bowl combine the sugar, shortening and egg, thoroughly mix using a rubber spatula. Add in the milk and stir until the sugar has dissolved. In a second bowl sift together the flour, baking powder, salt, cinnamon and nutmeg. Using your fingers crumble into this flour mixture the brown sugar. Blend the dry ingredients into the flour ingredients. Add the pecans, stir well. Spread the batter into the cake pan. Top with the apple slices, slightly pressing them into the batter. Sprinkle with the cinnamon/sugar mixture. Bank 25-35 minutes. The coffee cake is done baking when a toothpick inserted in the middle comes out clean. Serve warm with a bit of butter on top. (How I wished I had made some whipped cream to top this off)
No concerns about gold getting “killed.” I look at it as a buying opportunity, and looking back historically, sometimes you end up holding these positions for a while.
April 27 Mexico City, MX Foro Sol
2 tbsp butter (or 1 tbsp butter + 1 tbsp lemon curd)
I want you to be happy, I want you to live in happiness.
I’ll leave you with a photo of the proud survivors of my fleet. Unfortunately, the Ferrari couldn’t be found.
Life ring? Life buoy? Ah - the boy
“Let The Right One In” is a vampire story, or it’s a coming-of-age story, or it’s a love story. Or it’s all three. It’s a story about abuse, and about friendship, and about fear and about freedom. It’s horrific and haunting and oddly sweet and beautiful. Whether you’ve seen one of the two recent adaptations of it, or whether you’ve never heard of it before… once you’ve read it, you’ll never forget it.
Well, thank-you for showing interest and coming back to check in! I love sharing with you and you are greatly appreciated!
When you cannot walk up a flight a stairs without getting out of breath, you realise paid work is the last of your worries and losing weight should be a priority
“We’ve reached a critical point, a perilous point,” Japan’s new Prime Minister Naoto Kan said. “I understand that an immediate response is of paramount importance and would like to tackle the problem with a sense of urgency.”
Kuchen is a tasty dessert with a dough crust and custard filling. Usually fruit is found in kuchen, but cheese or sugar can be used instead. It is normally topped with cinnamon.
All you need to create crème Chantilly is a half pint of heavy whipping cream, a balloon whisk, and a bit of patience. If you've never whipped cream, check out these expert step-by-step directions and you'll have a bowl of delcious crème Chantilly in minutes.
Besides the ad, the White House is marking the first anniversary of the SEAL Team Six raid that killed bin Laden inside his compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan with a series of briefings and an NBC interview in the Situation Room designed to highlight the ‘gutsy call’ made by the President. here
Micheletto leads BoB to meet with Cesare, who says he knows all these guys hate each other (very true) but they hate the French more (also true). Cesare’s learned from Juan’s mistake and knows they can’t defeat a whole army, but they can seriously freak it out by leading raids. BoB’s cool with that.
Silicone is a very common element found in rocks and sand and makes up approximately 28% of the Earth’s crust.
The Keferloher solves both problems. Get a pint in a plastic beaker and pour it into the Keferloher. The excess carbonation gets knocked out of the beer, and you don’t have to drink out of plastic. The unfiltered version of St Mungo lager, Wild West, develops a splendid chewiness when treated like this. I always think beer tastes best in the open air drunk from one of these.
When several generations follow the family business there are certain things that are bound to be done right, like the food in Penang. It is understandable and no surprise that people wait for an hour to get the fish head soup at the “Line Clear” or the oyster omelet at the night bazaar along Gurney drive.
That is unschooling. It is not a model of education, but a way of life. It is recognizing that people learn from living, and there is no need to separate learning from living. Unschooling lets a family live together, learn together. It is built on trust among family members, and trust in human nature. Trust that children have a strong desire to learn about things, even if those things may not be on the short list of school subjects. Trust that, with your acceptance and support, your child will follow his own path, leading exactly where he wants to go.
What we can judge however is the institution. The institution of Mormonism is a different gospel than what Jesus Christ taught. (2 Corinthians 11:4) As believers in Jesus Christ it is our duty to seek the truth, and to know who Jesus is, and what he taught. (Luke 12:31, Matthew 6:33, Psalms 105:4,) These are instructions from Jesus himself.
The water has bugs, I think.
I've been collecting together the poetry I've written over the past few years, selecting the the stuff I'm reasonably pleased with and weeding out the rest. I've put it all together on a page, here for anyone who'd like to read it. There's a link to it, too, below the blog header, above.
I always knew I wanted to be an artist. I was lucky enough to have semi-private art lessons where we mostly used water colors and painted still lifes. Until I was in college, I only painted when I HAD to - I was scared of using color and especially afraid of acrylics which I thought of as “plastics pretending to be paint"!
without a love of my own
Since I got my iPad on Monday I’ve been spending some time looking for a good game to play on it. I’ve tried out a few, but the one that I keep going back to is Towers N’ Trolls HD. It’s basically a standard tower defense game, but I’m really enjoying it. There are three difficulty settings (Easy, Normal, and Hard). So far I’ve been able to get 3 out of 3 starts on all of the levels in the first area. There are a handful of levels unlocked when you get the game (it’s free on the app store) and you can unlock more with in-game gems (currency) that you earn for killing certain units. You buy/place towers and other “units” in the stages with coins that every unit “drops” when you kill them, but some units (and some situations like killing multiple units with one shot) earn you gems. You can also use the same gems to purchase upgrades for your towers like “speed” (shoot faster) and range (shoot farther) that apply to all your units as well as other gadgets. It’s 250 gems for a new level (which includes multiple stages) or 100 gems for an upgrade and if you’re impatient and don’t mind spending real money you can buy gems in the game (a la Zynga games on Facebook). What I like about the game so far is that I don’t feel like I’ll have to spend real money to unlock new levels or upgrades if I’m willing to “grind” some of the unlocked levels a few times to get more gems. I’m sure there will be some stages I play multiple times trying to get a better score.
Tell your other fourth grade teacher friends about this post!
I have written hundreds of nonfiction articles, white papers, and other pieces over the last twenty years, and I coauthored the books (redacted) IF NOT FOR THE COURAGE is my first novel.
The letters for 'Create' are from Ma Vinci, called 'Codex' I believe. Earlier this year I chose this word to symbolize in my art as much as I can. The other stamp is from River City Rubber Works, I omitted stamping the 'create' at the beginning of that stamp. All this stamping was done using Jet Black archival ink. On the tag I also added a feathery flourish (Nature's Elements) in Cobalt archival ink.
Rebecca is afraid of the dark and hates being alone, but that is how she finds herself in the beginning of Jeff Strand’s new novella Faint of Heart. When her husband Gary takes off on a camping trip in the Alaskan wilderness with some buddies, it leaves Rebecca all by her lonesome to deal with her fears. She is coping fine until a policeman comes to her door and tells her Gary is in trouble and needs her now.
much more space
Yesterday he come up to me and suddenly said biting hurts. I can’t even image the amount of pain he must be going through on a day to day basis. His wrists might be wounded but his soul is still bright and unhurt. I hope it always stays that way.
the translations, the background check (to double-check info etc), the timing to insert each and every phrase….
A large pair of silk bloomers that belonged to Queen Victoria have sold for more than three times their original estimate. The undergarment, auctioned alongside hundreds of other royal artefacts, sold for £9,735.
Staring out the window
cherries and berries
* Choice Rookies - inserted 1:2
Something happened - who knows what it was; drugs, booze, ego-inflation, coulda been anything - and now he functions mostly a a joke, but up until today, I had completely forgotten about one certain film this individual had made in his salad days. This is one that may actually not have been bad, but I don't think it has even been mentioned after its initial release.
When I arrived the rental car company handed me the keys to a Mercury Grand Marquis. I turned right around and said, "I'm so sorry, but I'm not sure I can drive at all in NJ - much less in a land yacht. Please tell me you have something slightly more drivable?" They did - a mini-van, but I was scared to ask for a third choice. It was hair-raising, but I was only flipped off three times, so I consider it a victory!
But I’m guessing photographers from Boston and other cities around New England (and the rest of the country) may well be interested. Scott Kelby and a long list of some of photography’s biggest names will be putting on a conference that blends aspects of photography and getting the most out of Google+.
And really, it’s not like I haven’t read anything. I’ve read quite a bit of the English classics, and I’ve read the usual German ones (Goethe, Schiller, and anything else they wanted us to read at school), and some of the international ones, like the Odyssey, and when I think about it, actually I have read quite a lot. But even as I type, I have the likes of Hebel, Storm, Hesse, Kleist, Stifter, … (= all of them are on the ‘should-be-read’ list of German literary canons) staring down at me from the shelf with reproachful bindings. Not to mention all the American and English ones I haven’t read.
This isn’t something to hold against them – it’s a story repeated across the country and cause for sympathy. But it’s one of the reasons why the club must be such a source of pride to its fans.
Boyfriend dearest, this is on my Christmas wish list! Have a word with Santa will you?
who picks the Challenge for us all.
13. Women were a major force for Prohibition -- they were feeling empowered by the suffragist movement and the Progressive movement -- and, again, for Repeal. Upper-class women were revolted by the corruption, by the blatant hypocrisy of Dry politicians who drank like fish, and by the lack of human sympathy displayed by the more cruel Drys (those guys who wanted to poison the drunks). Urban Catholics and immigrants were against Prohibition because it simply seemed unnatural to them; well, it was.
The other picture,you can get the clock widget image from
Now, we are off to do some delivering!
If I feel so inclined for a farther walk, I wouldn’t be surprised if I made a jaunt back into Brier Creek. The walks are pretty, just don’t ask me to live there.
This technological millennia is quite awesome for the fact that shelters and humane societies put pictures of their adoptables online. Knowing myself and that it would be nearly impossible to leave the shelter with out a pet, this was a life saver. I resolved not visit a shelter until there was a specific dog I wanted to pursue. 10 months later, there was. Shelby was an adorable white 8-year-old Jack Russell with one black patch over her eye, and I was ready to meet her. (I know what you’re thinking: Jordan, that is not a description of the dog in the picture above.)
Guide to Bank Robbery - Rule #1: Make sure your getaway car is big enough to carry away your stolen goods.
May 2010 bring you and your family many blessings! God bless!
This month feels different. I guess we're just both in a different place, mentally. Last month, we were sooooo excited. We had confidence, optimism, we were praying non-stop, asking for prayers non-stop, talking about it non-stop, thinking about it non-stop. And then we got a massive let down. I think we're both still licking our wounds.
until smooth. Pour over popcorn and mix well. Add a bit
BBW Leaves & Cozy Autumn Vanilla - OK so my house has smelled like Leaves since it was re-released this fall LOL. I have candles in that scent everywhere and I also have a Wallflower going near my front entrance. So amazing! Cozy Autumn Vanilla is that slutty vanilla scent, but it's so amazing. I've grabbed so many of the lotions when they went 75% off I will smell like a whore forever!!!
Can you make it through this 911 call? Can you? Can you tell me after you listen, that it is okay for our President and our Government to fund a trip of a cleric to raise money for this incredible slap in the face?
I must say I am usually underwhelmed by wedding fairs but Luella's has style. Oh so much style. It is just so refreshing to meet suppliers who actually want to be part of your day. For me enthusiasm is just as important as style.
Prep the kebabs:
Wow, I had friends I didn’t even know existed. I looked at Princess, who was staring at of the window worriedly.
The actual hearing is scheduled from 2PM-5PM and 6PM-8PM. DDDB asks the public to sign in and testify against the project. If you are unable to come for the afternoon protest and hearing, DDDB urges you to come for the late afternoon/evening hearing.
Wall Street - but what’s bad about that?
You may notice that I scrap a lot about myself, while I still have two children. One is that my husband is not very into publishing photos online from them.. a bit protective I guess, but ofcourse I accept his thoughts and feelings (although I will sneak one in once in a while LOL).. another factor is that I DO love to scrap about myself. Not only because I am important too, but to self reflect, to learn, to accept.
Yet, the one thing that cannot be denied is the quality of the food. Yes, it’s true that price and quantity seem to be moving in opposite directions as the years go on, with the former rising as the latter falls. But while the value of the food may legitimately be called into question, the taste of it cannot. Spring Rolls, Cellophane Noodles with Crab, Caramelized Shrimp, Claypot Chicken, Sugar Snap Peas – all have held up extremely well since those early days on Valencia Street. But the very first dish from Phan that captivated me, the one I still view as a must-have on any visit and that tastes as good as ever, is the Shaking Beef. Tender cubes of filet mignon are sautéed with red onions and a soy vinaigrette, and then served with a pepper and lime juice dipping sauce. The result is outstanding.
Barbell Biceps Curls - 4 Sets of 12 reps with 32.5kg
Although political and economic factors will obviously also play a role, the selection-process will focus on the best possible operating environment for the telescope.
According to the story, Sahibañ, once, when struck by the maulvi for not memorizing her lesson correctly, addresses him thus:
(they are the ones on the right).
She dims
It always makes me smile when I see them, and the sky was so pretty just at that moment.
Streamer fishing can be on and off at this time of the year, always worth working the shorlines for those big Browns, you never know.
If your nasal passage just shut down in defence, merely at the thought, I am not surprised.
Sorry this post is short, but like i said in my previous post everything will be back to normal once they are leaving...and by the starting of September i should be back to my regular posting rates...
*are still the BEST sleeper
View from our back windows
At the end of the letter, the scene cuts to show the opposite side of Fonda. Morgan is off to the left, only a sliver of the back of his head showing. His illiterate character has understood the words as fully as anyone else in that saloon, and we know it from the brim of his hat, as it drops with his head in a gesture that isn't only respect for the dead. Andrews' character spent the last hour of his life knowing he was innocent and he was going to die, and then he did die, strangled at the end of a rope. From the back of Morgan's head, barely in frame, we know the drifter won't ever be able to defend himself from his memories by saying the dead man was a fool. Then the camera, after seeking out the men from the posse once more, moves higher to show the length of the bar and Morgan in the middle. His one good hand is still wrapped around his glass, he still looks in the same direction, but he stands straighter. Then Morgan turns to follow Fonda with a slightly saddle-weary gait.
It’s common for people to go to great lengths and expense in the pursuit of beauty. Cosmetics, fashion and even the medical industry vie for your attention and dollars. There are a million ways to enhance your physical beauty. How much will it cost? Will you ever be satisfied? Will you really feel more beautiful? Following are a series of suggestions that offer a holistic and spiritual approach to the more beautiful you.
Onto another friend's house to watch Eurovision, which was highly entertaining as always!
“All of them, the people who say I’m racist, they are racist because they say I’m racist,” he added, with a smile.
Was there a sadness there? Or was she just bored, sitting there waiting for her mother or her husband. I sometimes have moments like that myself. You stare into the distance and suddenly realise that you've lost twenty minutes. As I was watching her a pigeon landed near her. I guess it had seen some crumbs or something. I hate the fucking things myself - rats with wings.
Carry on kidding yourself.
IRON MAN grins, turns his back to THOR and whistles “If I Had A Hammer”. THOR doesn’t get it. HAWKEYE and BLACK WIDOW smirk to give them something to do.
Anyhow . . . . . .
“I don’t think you specified.”
If you don't have lots of soul
3) psychopaths, being control-driven, want to WIN. To them, winning means catching their targets into their spider’s nets and destroying them
Say goodbye to your precious cheeseburgers because you’re now going to have a garden salad.
Slowly add in tamarind mix to warm rice till it reaches desired taste, if required add more salt. After it is mixed let them sit for about three hours for flavors to set in. Goes well with papads or simple potato chips!
Overall, I was left sadly unsatisfied. I had heard so many brilliant things about The Hunger Games and the following books, that I really wanted to love it. But I just couldn’t connect with it. I felt no connection with the plot or the main characters, Katniss irritated me, and I wanted to know more. I’m not saying that you shouldn’t read The Hunger Games – you should. Every person would approach this book differently, every person’s reading experience would be different.
‘You must remember. You must. I remember her arms too. It’s perfectly true. They only came down a little below where they should be and they were supposed to be flattish, but you never really saw them because she wore big sleeves, big full ones, and I think they were sewn up at the ends. But they looked flattish, like flippers, and she held them against her sides or across her chest and she moved them rather awkwardly. But you could never see her legs. We always wanted to. We wanted to see her in the bath and of course we couldn’t, and it was terrible. I remember, never being able to know, and of course we couldn’t ask her or anyone else really – anyway we couldn’t get proper answers from anyone. And, you see, she was always in the same kind of dress – a long, long grey shiny dress, silk I think, that fastened at the neck with a close collar and came right down to the ground and hid everything.
So an hour later I’m back home. And I’m writing this. And I’m wondering if whether whilst I was wasting my time on you when you clearly can’t show me you want me to be yours some other beautiful man could have been standing next to me.
-ramps (also called "wild leek" and found stream side)
No rain nor rivers flow
When to use: As a foolhardy refrain in the face of inevitable destruction this quote is second-to-none. It’s especially useful when your team is down and an opposing fan is mocking their efforts. That’ll show him!
Dion dodged a bullet when he decided not to spend $36 for a seat on a small airplane after finishing a stop on the Winter Dance Party tour in February 1959. That was the same plane that went down shortly after takeoff, killing Buddy Holly, Ritchie Valens, and The Big Bopper. Dion said he couldn't justify paying that much for one ride, considering that was the same amount his parents paid each month to rent his childhood apartment!
I've had a wobble over the novel-in-progress recently anyway. I felt like I was going in the wrong direction, so took a deep breath and cut loads of it out. (Ouch.) Then I had a panic about how my word count had plummeted and an oh-shit-I-am-never-going-to-finish-this! freak-out. (Heeeeeelp!) BUT today I think I've turned a corner. Now I feel I'm back on track. I just have to keep plodding along, like Eddie Izzard, one foot after another, one word after another... and have a little faith that I'll get there in the end.
OMF diamond-encrusted God. And, also, is Cracked not only written for 14 year old boys but staffed by them as well?, because holy shit. If you learned everything you know about women from a 15 second Zales commercial, you probably shouldn’t be editorializing about the fairer sex.
May 19 San Fransisco, California - Milk Bar
Wood Working Stuff…
thank you ladies and gentleman
Some people make changes because they can't sit still for five minutes. I'm talking about a hefty percentage of the relentless go-getters and ambitious citizens of the District. I know DC isn't the only place where people get into a loop of go-go-go. Impatience is a sign of anxiety. It's not balanced and is not what the neuroscientists are talking about.
Creative Memories heart punch
And your beautiful eyes gazed at me
I have not moved my MobileMe account to iCloud yet for many reasons. Anyway, Apple offered me a free copy of Snow Leopard so I can upgrade to Lion. I already have OS X Lion on one of my Macs, but that’s beside the point. Let’s say I’m doing this for science.
Please pantomime ---a way to show respect to someone in your family (...perhaps pick up toys).
Texture: Slightly tacky. Uh-oh.
I've banged on often about the importance of saving our libraries here and elsewhere, along with many others on this blog. If all these children do not own a book, for a variety of reasons, many of which are to do with socio-economic factors, where are they most likely to be helped to appreciate that books and reading are important? School? Of course. But many school librarians have now felt the sharp sting of the axe edge. So, the local library - if there is one left. This is why I beg all of you to put a date in your diaries, Saturday 4th February, 2012, which has been designated National Libraries Day. Much will be happening, and your support will be vital. You can keep an eye on what's going on by joining the Campaign for the Book's Official Facebook page, where you will find regular updates on this and other library news from Alan Gibbons. We must all make our voices heard, and loudly, to preserve what we already have for those millions of children and adults who need access to libraries and books so badly. Damn those who say libraries are not important, and an extravagance in this time of recession and cuts. Our libraries are an essential cornerstone of literacy. They are essential, full stop.
¡Feliz Pascua de Resurrección!
I would say the best books out there for age 10 and up featuring trolls are by Katherine Langrish, an expert in folklore and medieval studies who also has an excellent blog. Her trilogy—Troll Fell, Troll Mill, and Troll Blood—begins when Peter Ulfsson is orphaned and sent to live with his horrible uncles, Baldur and Grim, who would be more than a match for James' aunts Spiker and Sponge in Dahl's well-known book. Turns out Peter's uncles are planning to sell human children to the trolls who live under the mountain in exchange for gold. Three troll books worth looking for!
You can tell. Or I’m pretty sure you can. I had a low tolerance for Holden Caulfield when I was younger (‘get a life, young man!’). Now that I’m getting old and crabbit, ironically, I can see where he’s coming from with the ‘phoney’ thing. They say fiction writers tell lies for a living, but there’s true lies as well as the other kind.
And I'm going to tell him to stay off the dang loudspeaker system unless it's really necessary. No point in letting him annoy the whole neighborhood.
SB 1.16.18
It was a wonderful collaborative connection and made me feel grateful to be witnessing a healing they brought about for themselves.
This past weekend, I decided to try a new recipe, one I found in a discarded issue of Bon Appetit that was hiding in my living room couch. I usually shy away from Bon Appetit’s recipes, not so much because they’re intimidating (which oftentimes, they are), but because of the lengthy ingredient lists and time-consuming process. How many of us have candied ginger in our pantries, or want to take the time to cut almonds into slivers? Yes, good food takes time, effort, and concentration…But by Sunday night, I’m starting to lag in those three categories. Which is why the Blackberry Financiers were the perfect solution to a sugar craving I had at 8 PM on a Sunday night.
*No animals were harmed in the reading of The Hunger Games.
Daughter #2 took lessons for a while but wasn’t into it.
1/2 lb. Maltodextrin
I looked out the window and seen his bald head
with creme fraiche and leeks and spring onions
Weddings with dancing
My blog needs to be 500 words, so i need to add more.
“Step forward. I want to see you” I breathed in a low voice.
Michael is concerned that his departure will leave a literary void. “The library is closing for three months too. The village won’t have an obvious book outlet for the festival. It will be a bit odd.”
This statement is made in reaction to Boo’s motion to the state’s legislative assembly seating to request for a debate on toll charges during the assembly which begins on March 15.
Scrawl down for more inspiration and to join in Bizzy Bec's March Store blog Challenge.
Phone Number: 623-215-5607
Haven’t we been down this road before? A few years ago, it was BusRadio promising to make school buses safer and calmer with its student-targeted radio broadcasts. Now it’s television that marketers claim will soothe the beast. From theDallas Morning News:
The Cathechism says that I need Christ to be Prophet because I am ignorant; Priest, because I am guilty, and King because I am weak and helpless. Sounds like the roots of all my fears.
Our first course was a garden salad and then we could choose Irish stew or a poached salmon with white wine dill sauce. I had the salmon which was fantastic. I also tried a bite of the stew which was excellent. Dessert was homemade apple pie with fresh cream which was beyond yummy! The last thing served was traditional barm brack. This is a yeasted bread with raisins. It is sweeter than bread, but not as sweet as cake. It is actually a Halloween tradition that was used as a fortune telling game. Inside the bread was baked a pea, a stick, a piece of cloth, a small coin, and a ring. If you had the piece with one of the items it meant something. The pea meant that the person would not marry in the year. The stick, "to beat one's wife with" meant that the person would have an unhappy marriage or continually be in disputes. The rag meant that one would have bad luck while the coin meant good luck or fortune. The ring meant that the person would be wed by December. At our feast we were told that there were only rings in the barm brack and to see who got it. Jemma dug through that bread like nobody's business and while she was looking away, the Fear an Ti slipped a ring onto her plate! She was ecstatic!!!
I begged my Mom to tell that story over and over again. And each time I wanted more details—Why did my Grandfather love kids? What did his laugh sound like? What time of year was it? Was he lying on the grass? Was he wearing an undershirt? Was it dirty? I was desperate for details. I loved the details. Ordinary details, but they made my Mom’s story about my Grandfather special.
But since we love men who fly, how about more AF videos you say? Glad to oblige (btw, AF just reminds me of Abercrombie and Fitch - they've just opened a new store in Singapore, you should practice your googling skills for a bit of an eye-wash).
A wish to change can be born ... intentionally too. Just because
So, what did you do? Did all the family get together and cousins all play football/baseball/tag, etc while the grown-ups chatted away? That's what happened here! After a wonderful meal and even better fellowship, we all packed up and made our rounds to the hospital. It was truely a wonderful day that could only have been better if the grandparents could have joined us. Even my nearly 94 year old grandmother joined us! Amazing!
*There are numerous internet sites that allow you to download MP3 files of books you want your family to listen to, or you can listen to them online. Try these to start: Books Should Be Free and My Audio School. Check out my website, homeschool-for-free, for more choices.
It’s my 60th post so far. It’s quite a little number having in mind that I started writing my blog a bit more than 2 years ago, right? Well, I always write my blog following one main rule that I won’t write a blog about personal stuff, blabbing and/or crying about unfair life or useless and not interesting things that are only important to me. (I’m quite emo, huh?)
but it won’t won’t, at least I don’t believe it will...
From somewhere I found the urge to discover the Arthurian Legend which I'm only vaguely familiar with. I suspect this urge originated with rave reviews of the old Chaosium RPG, Pendragon and the BBC series, Merlin. When looking up fictional series that might be on audio book, Lawhead's series appeared on a few lists. I was reminded and figured it was time I fnished the book and start the series.
Blessings…
Before Christmas, I bought these curvy white spindle bookends for Kevin's aunt. I loved them and wished I could keep them. While I was at Indigo (three times in one week!), I fell in love with a candle. It was gardenia-scented, and in a pretty mercury glass container. Normally, I dislike strong floral scents, usually going for spice-scented candles.
"I don't get this."
Writing a daily blog?
Psalm 115:15-16
I have a valiant 6 year old who loves to read and play.
I started out doing genealogy the old-fashioned way. It was kind of like going big-game hunting. You had to go someplace to do it; you had to learn how to hunt; you had to plan ahead for your trip; you had to pack carefully and be prepared for anything, or nothing. It was an adventure.
The facility is a state of the art “grass root” refinery run as a subsidiary of ONGC. It has been praised for its “versatile design“ and its “high flexibility to process Crudes of various API and with high degree of Automation.“
Introducing Blue Sail Studios by the sea jewelry collection handmade organic rustic styling in fine silver. From ocean waves to starfish my new collection is underway. Early stages at the moment but, it's moving forward which is the important part right?
Check that one off my list.
So what did I do? Took my rejection and my loss and I allowed myself to feel disappointed, sad and cry, because that what was honest, and as that moment passed I reexamined my work and I found that I was happy with the work that I put forth and then I submitted elsewhere.
The Lord allows trials to come our way to test us, but that is not His primary purpose. Rather, our afflictions are to teach us to walk rightly before Him. The Bible says: "Many are the afflictions of the righteous . . ." (Psalm 34:19). According to the psalmist, the point of all our afflictions is for us to learn from them.
Against this background I deplore the tendency which seems to me to have been growing in leading Government spokesmen in the last few weeks to pose as crusaders for spiritual values in the struggle against the world's materialists. Frankly, I think this sort of posture striking comes no better from them than it did from Mr. Foster Dulles—especially when the temple of their religion is the bingo parlour and when their
Welcome to the new IS&S Network Services blog! We have created this space as a source of information for everyone so that you can find answers to commonly asked questions quickly and easily, and as a source for up to the minute new regarding the status of the network.
How does it affect this site? Well, in some ways it doesn't except that I won't be writing any more manga obsessed entries over here. Here, I'll be sticking to writing related topics. I will, at least for the time being, keep the manga widget, but it might eventually be replaced with books I recommend reading and why. Eventually.
It's always nice to be recognized by our peers. In accordance with accepting the award I am answering the following questions and then passing the award along to others:
Flannelboard: When You’re Going to the Moon. This wonderful idea came from Mel’s Desk. To go along with it, we sang “When You’re Going to the Moon” to the tune of “If You’re Happy and You Know It.” Pre-K especially loved this activity. Thanks, Mel’s Desk!
- Same results as obtained using EAC
The B&B I had booked is run by an American who is into all things green and organic and on our arrival we were greeted like old friends with all embracing hugs and kisses.
12) I gave up on finding the faucet handle and stood, covering the faucet with my hand, which only resulted in the water spraying everywhere. I grabbed around for one of the raincoats, and I found one under a sopping wet parka that suddenly weighed 20 pounds. I put it halfway on with one hand, then quickly switched my hands on the faucet and finished getting the coat on. (I was already soaking wet. I’m not sure why I thought putting on a coat would be a good idea at the time. Maybe it was years of conditioning by my parents.) I pulled the hood up over my head and looked around again. There were now two inches of water on the bottom of the closet.
I had the rare pleasure of spending the day with my oldest son and young Aiden yesterday. We dropped off their car at the dealership for some routine maintenance and then headed out to the golf course.
Alistair Glover, Clearwater Campus, is a May 2012 graduate who was President of Phi Theta Kappa and the Student Government Association on the Clearwater Campus, as well as Communications Director and State Secretary of the Florida College System Student Government Association.
Increasing class sizes could be the slippery slope to allowing more changes to creep into an already flawed mainstream education system, at the moment.
Jeanette~
1 cup warm water
I like his work even more now..just look at how 3D the characters are...with weight..and great emotions..I would love to be able to draw in this solid way..my cartoons come out flat:) Every panel is also different and varied..
Pin them on to see where you like the placement best. One thing you also need to keep in mind is how heavy the body of the top/dress is. If you made this dress length, the body will be heavier and stretch the shirred straps more than you might think they would. So you would need to adjust for that when you pin the straps on. This is a hard thing to get perfect if you are doing it without the one who will wear it by your side. But you can. Just hang it on a hanger and pull on it yourself until you think it feels right. Sorry that's pretty vague but it's a trial and error kind of thing.
“Disruptions, listen up!”
Roof? Seems the simplest of words right? No. Ruff. Ruff? There are two Os people!!
My lack of postings reflected Iowa politics until our governor decided to appoint a Democrat Senator to a state board of dubious necessity. Now a special election between an unknown (to me) and a former news-babe from local KCRG News, will set the balance of power over the next session. Lots of money flowing in state-wide and the local TV stations are busy.
it nods, folded like a sleeping bird,
a. Introduction. If the hydraulic brake system, and the drum and brake shoe clearance are satisfactory, when brake pedal is depressed with sufficient force to set brakes firmly, the pedal will have a “solid” feel, with at least 2 inches of floorboard clearance. During the initial 1/4 to 1/2 inch of pedal travel, the pedal should move freely (if pedal clearance is correctly adjusted it will be 3/4 inch for the WW2 jeep). The sub-paragraphs below furnish probable remedies for various behaviors of a defective brake system, based on the behavior of the brake pedal as a symptom.
200ml/7oz double cream
The water level in the lake varies from season to season. At times, the level recedes. At one visit, the water level was so high I couldn’t reach an old pier which did not stretch all the way to the shore line.
After the parade was over, we stumbled upon a ‘new to us’ snack stand and my husband discovered and fell in love with a ‘new to him’ raspberry lemonade slush. The kids also enjoyed their orange slushes. Not to be confused with orange lushes.
Or those with Down’s will start to frown
Does that seem radical?
This morning, I woke up and realized I had not phoned my mother in over 48 hours, oops. I went ahead and bit the bullet, dialed the number and hoped that she would rush me off the phone. It's not that I don't have any interest in communicating with her, but I really despise chit chat. I like to say what needs to be said and then hang up. It inevitably causes conflict between us, it's a familiar dance at this point.
A quick run down of colors I used:
Inside, there was not much more affection for Hodg son. The tabloid’s chief sports writer, Steven Howard, was distinctly underwhelmed by Hodgson’s opening press conference and hinted heavily that his preferred choice for the job was someone else: “It wasn’t the all-singing, all-dancing debut we might have expected from Harry Redknapp with journalists rolling around in the aisles and the men who might have appointed him but didn’t slapping each other on the back and thinking: ‘He’s got them eating out of his hand already.’”
I reach out;
Ok, back to birthdays. In my opinion, there’s no better day to celebrate life and I think a birthday should be special for everyone. I’ve never understood the people who don’t want to make a big deal of out their’s or worse, get really depressed. You’ve made it one more year, so why not be happy about it and do something fun?!
The papers presented at the conference dealt with a wide range of related topics from various disciplines, such as history, philosophy, culture and traditions of Ismaili Muslims, and highlighted the degree of their study in Russian scholarship. Speakers at the conference represented various academic institutions, including University of Central Asia, University of Toronto, Tajik Academy of Sciences, Institutes of Ethnography, Anthropology, Linguistics and Oriental Studies in Moscow.
Ever find someone's beauty radiates, permeates, and magnetizes you toward them? And they're not even in the same room...
Button from Papertrey Ink
(Together)
BRECKENRIDGE - Lucky U IPA (In Cans!)
The Sound of Music Festival has grown to be a formidable force – I fulfilled a life-long fantasy by catching Devo’s set there last summer – but it used to be a much smaller affair.
While reading the blurb of the book I assumed this story will be centered around Audra, but I must admit I was tricked (in a good way of course). Ashley Fontainne created a complex thriller with many interwoven stories. Each of her characters tells a story explaining their relationship with Olin, revealing a bit of Olin's nasty and cruel nature. I must admit I was fascinated by this!
That aside, My Family uses a mostly unknown cast (with the exceptions of Jimmy Smits, Edward James Olmos and Esai Morales, who finally gets his first really good role since making an impression as Ritchie Valens' brother in 1987's La Bamba) to great effect in telling its story of family crises and celebrations.
I know that all of you readers out there are terribly responsible with your money. You have "savings accounts" and have 3 months of salary in reserve for a rainy day and you are responsible with your credit cards and lose sleep over interest rates.
Jabu! You only need to look at this man’s record in Sarawak Report to see how he is probably the most unsuitable person, apart from Taib himself, in the whole of Sarawak to be in charge of a land exchange system.
63. Cf. Inferno, iii. 55-7.
Justin McCahren
Obama’s campaign implemented the same lack of verification in 2008, but the mainstream media never called them on it. It appears as though that episode has prompted a repeat in 2012.
I've kinda neglected it lately..... along with my running shoes.
Is this another case of Domestic Violence? The story is reported saying that Drugs may have played a role in the twos quarrel, however, it’s just speculation as of now. It should be considered a tragedy for a woman to be gunned down like next weeks dinner. Multiple Gunshot wounds killed Jessica and it looks like they are looking for a self defense claim. It is too premature to discuss that, so why are they bringing this up? What is the point of trying to avoid an arrest or formal charging? What’s not being said in this case?
Today, I often start with a simple design idea, an image, threads, or even a stitch. I also create designs to try new techniques.
And now I see I'm all alone
Muzzle - Adam Sandler. Ugh, I hate all of his movies after Big Daddy, and I really hate that movie execs keep trying to sell him as a hot leading man. A valid love interest for Kate Beckinsale? Jennifer Aniston? Salma Hayak? Leslie Mann? Are you freakin kidding me? He is unattractive and decidedly not funny. Muzzle, please.
Maybe my dad is making a big deal out of this. What if Uncle Bobby had been killed by a bus … would that mean I couldn’t take the bus? What harm would a little ride to the end of the street be?
Rescuer: "You're going to hell."
I have nothing against academics (I teach graduate critical theory, after all), but I just have a hard time with that kind of language on a blog. Then again, maybe my idea of the ontological status of the blog, its discursive practices, and epistemic fields of reference (sorry, couldn't resist) is just misguided or overly restrictive. In any case, "Still Searching" is worth a read and I admire its ambition. Check it out and see what you think.
Join me and share art miniatures on stamps.
Aren't flowers reproductive systems just examples of nature finding ways to be ever more effective at reproduction? After all the bees, & company, want the nectar & pollen to grow their colonies as much as plants want to maximise their futures by reproduction.
I hadn’t coloured this image by House Mouse before, and the apples are a bit hit and miss – any hints on how to colour a nice shiny red and green apple would be gratefully received! Hoping it’ll pass muster with the old dear, though ;)
Just because you allowed life, disappointment, regrets, people, low self esteem, (fill in the blank), to kill your dreams, does not mean you need to discard them. The power is still there, you still carry that hope and dream around with you. It hasn’t lost its capacity to perform. You just need to connect to the right sources, fix the blocks you’ve erected and get powered up again.
Dan Huggs - I loved you. And I still do.
place to store images and sites that inspire you, places you want to revisit, projects you want to accomplish, recipes you want to try and so forth. It is a marvelous way to bookmark websites for future reference. It is also a wonderful place to get incredible ideas – and to network.
FEB 4
I find myself engaged in a game. Kind of like a game of poker, only unlike any I’ve ever played before. The cards in play don’t come from a 52 count deck; the game is played with the cards that life has handed us. I can’t see the other players, nor am I sure how many are involved. I don’t think any of that matters. Ultimately, as always, it will boil down only to how I play.
Who is or was Osama?
And who do you think you are?
- 5,000 to 10,000 Filipino died
a. A whip
1350 *D-IV/29/2000. “Emily Dickinson and the Demise of Death.” Seminar, Lenoir-Rhyne College Hickory Humanities Forum, Wildacres Conference Center, Little Switzerland, North Carolina. (Incorporated in Item C-2002(2), above, pp. 22-29.)
Tokelo Nhlapo, a member of the Student Representative Council at the university and also a member of the ANC youth league sang the song while the group was waiting for Malema's arrival to deliver a speech on 'economic freedom'.
See you next week, hopefully with some creative takes on these items.....
Oil spills seem to unfortunately be a fact of life when drilling and transporting oil from the ocean floor. Massive spills, like BP’s disastrous four-million barrel belch in the Gulf of Mexico last year, though, are totally unacceptable. But the leaking of a few hundred barrels of oil per year seems to be par for the course when extracting millions.
I am SO excited to be participating in today's Marvelous Middle-Grade Monday, yay!!! Did I say I was excited? So, yes, I am a big fan of Shannon Messenger who created MMGM to shine a spotlight on sharing and discussing fantastic middle-grade literature. Please click here to visit her website and view a list of links to other blogs participating in MMGM with reviews, contests, and more. Plus, follow Shannon to learn all about the release of both her debut middle-grade novel AND debut young adult novel coming soon. I can't wait to read them both!
All these decades he was kept at the Kot Lakhpat Jail in Lahore. His jail term ended in December last year, said sources. The family has repeatedly taken up the matter with the BSF. The organisation says it has held meetings with the Pakistani Rangers to facilitate Singh’s deportation.
The House of Trembling Madness
The beer itself has a fantastic fruity aroma of orange, lemons and apricots with just a hint of biscuity malt in the background. The taste is a riot of ripe juicy fruits - bittersweet and incredibly easy drinking for an almost 6% beer. Now I'm not one for telling you how good a beer is in comparison to another bee..... oh, no wait I totally am that guy! I had a bottle of Goose Island before this bottle and this is sooooo much better! Plus it's in a bigger bottle! Woop Woop!
Best thing from 2009 I didn’t hear until 2010
Unuttered or expressed,
55g/2oz plain flour
We are spending Christmas Eve at some very special friend's.
Found out I'm getting 2 more nieces/nephews this year
AND ROB THE BANK OR EVEN THE STORE
He finds himself alone.
Today, L and I went out to our favourite diner for brunch. I also mailed the last two sets of presents for Lorena and Christie from my birthday challenge! Exciting!
It’s very unlike me to not try to be a superhero/control freak when it comes to the baby, completely OCD when it comes to tidying and putting away folded clothes, and manic about all the things that need cleaning and doing in the house. Even as I am typing, half my brain is feeling out of sorts because of the unfolded clothes and the messy things I haven’t neatened into straight lines.
It remains to see whether this is going to stand. The Muslim Brotherhood's Freedom and Justice Party had a second candidate ready in the wings, Mohamed Morsi. And the Salifis have Abdel Moneim Aboul Fotouh. But a change at this point obviously hurts both candidates, the Islamists and Salafis are livid and it remains to be seen whether the military junta is going to be able to pull this switcheroo off.
try again even as I cry again…..
Once again, Dylan begins acting strange, and the original film pops up on the television in the middle of the night. The next day, she talks with John Saxon at the park about her nerves, the possibility of mental illness, and Dylan’s weirdness. Dylan climbs up a huge tower that doesn’t seem to be too safe for children anyway, and he falls. Luckily, Heather catches him just in time, but you know that had to hurt. She receives more harassing mail and phone calls, and decides to phone Robert. He is at his home, painting, looking quite normal and un-Freddy-like. He begins to act evasive when she mentions her dreams, and how Freddy is actually darker and more evil in them. He recognizes this, and when the camera pulls back, that is exactly what he is painting.
You were the dandy,
Once Upon a time people were given Hope Chests.
It was a pretty big tumor, so it's going to be a pretty big scar. It's all stapled together instead of stitched because the vet said that cats don't tend to mess with staples like they do stitches. Sure enough, Doogie has left it alone. He doesn't seem bothered by it at all, which is wonderful! I just wish we could say the same for Ninja...
Other: Canvas (fabric store), Sewing Machine, Needle & Thread, Cotton, Dried Lavendar, Lavendar Essential Oil, Cheesecloth
This is truly a multi-cultural book, but one that also highlights the difficulties people can sometimes face when trying to fit into other cultures, or when you're homesick for the country and culture you know and grew up with. No matter who you are or where you end up, feelings are the same the world over and it can be strange when you're outside of your comfort zone and trying to fit in, but also deeply rewarding too. Too learn about other cultures and traditions in such a child-friendly way can only help promote greater understanding of different cultures, and the book also includes a small dictionary of word definitions and a rather yummy sounding recipe that I really must try myself.
Any comments on if / how this can workout?
Around the world and back again!
After measuring, cutting and ironing the fabric, we laid it out on the floor face down. Then, placed down the foam and the MDF board on top.
My DESTINY is connected to my past BUT my destiny is surely greater than my past….
68. It is not possible to tickle yourself. The cerebellum, a part of the brain, warns the rest of the brain that you are about to tickle yourself. Since your brain knows this, it ignores the resulting sensation.
43. A Suitable Boy - Vikram Seth
Then I became a teachers wife, and mommy to more than my own.. Our friend Emmett came to us. We worked that way for a long time..
I am here to the end
This is my take, I've called it "Chimera", you'll understand why when you read the journalling tee hee ;)) The backing paper and all fussy cut details are from KaiserCraft.
In a perfect world I am hoping it will run something like this...
The story is about four bright and mature sixth graders who are the underdogs at the Academic Bowl (like Academic Decathlon, but for middle school). But their experiences (and the way they reflect on their experiences) make them wise beyond their years. They are called The Souls, which I thought was a little cheesy, and maybe the only wrong note in this whole book, but I thought of them as The Old Souls. They were able to find an acceptance of themselves that helped give them self-confidence and the ability to rise above typical sixth grade drama, like bullying and playing tricks on the teacher.
But I have this miserable cold and just didn't feel like socializing. So my husband gave me his headlamp (for, of course, he is prepared for stuff like this. Me? I've got a plate of five tea light candles I'm carrying through the house.) And I got to sit and READ.
Likely - 13:00
home of the brave here.. not charged, ends up in intensive care due to negligence of a government that’s supposed to protect us, not injure us.
A would-be copper thief was gravely injured early Saturday morning when he attempted to steal copper wiring from a live Edison vault, according to authorities.
I truly believe in the power of humor and the basic human need to laugh. Without humor, life is dull and boring. Humor can turn any situation around. It can heal heartache and transform despair into hope. When life begins to feel heavy and overwhelming, laughter is the most amazing way to reduce stress. I am a happy person and so is my husband. We live a happy life together and I really feel that humor is a major contributor to our happiness.
And we then must not forget to pray for ourselves and for wisdom in how we can be a blessing to our husbands. "God, how can I bless my husband today? What things can I do to make his life more joyful and easier? How can I help to relieve the daily stress he faces out in the world? God, what do I need to change about myself to be the wife that you designed me to be? Lord, what characteristics and personality traits of mine can lead to my husband becoming exasperated? Father, I want to serve my husband and build my husband up, show me specifically some ways that I can do that."
So that was why Ju-Ju had to get over
We’ll be fine.
I AM mom enough for Toph.
And here's your chance to win an ecopy of the book!
And even though there is a lot of journalling there, it still doesn't express all of the feelings I feel.
I just finished having a good laugh,
Instead of dropping to the box behind me that I’d been using to step into the bands, I dropped to the floor with one foot still in the bands. I lost my balance, tumbled over my box, thankfully my foot sprung free from the bands. After a very graceless one-footed dance, I wound up flat on my back on the gym floor. A couple of folks called out, and Jack came by, to check on me. I assured them all I wasn’t hurt, but really PISSED because I still had to get back up in those bands for a final rep! Yeesh! The indignity of it all. Even in the moment, it was pretty comical. After a moment to compose myself, I got back in the bands and knocked out the 100th rep in the 13th set.
In an obvious attempt to inflict a symmetrical Climategate-style scandal on the skeptic community, someone representing himself as a Heartland Institute insider “leaked” internal documents for Heartland’s most recent board of directors meeting to a fringe environmental blog, along with a photocopy of a supposed Heartland “strategy memo” outlining a plan to disseminate a public school curriculum aimed at “dissuading teachers from teaching science.”
Another favorite was downtown...The Driftwood Restaurant.
-heat the oil in a large skilley over medium-high heat. Add the celery and cook, tossing, for 2 minutes. Add the snow peas and chili pepper and cook, tossing, until the veggies are just tender, about 2 minutes more.
6” x 6” x 4 ” Top tier (holds 2 cupcakes or one small cake stand)
N: Did you just have a mohair re-root?
Brake cooling necessity: Medium
And he made her his, at the Roseville Fair
Once i receive all the below information's from you via email attachment,l will send you a detail email on the next stage of this transaction.
3. Dungarees- My ex-mother-in-law still calls jeans, dungarees. “I bought Alex a pair of dungarees today.” The term came from the fabric that was made and sold in Dungari Killa in Bombay (now Mumbai) India many years ago.
Incidentally, Ilyumzhinov has made claims that he was once taken on board an alien spaceship which had come to planet Earth to take samples - and claims to have several witnesses. He is also president of Kalmykia, a small Buddhist region of Russia which lies on the shores of the Caspian Sea, where he, as president of the World Chess Federation, has spent tens of millions of dollars turning the impoverished republic into a mecca for international chess tournaments. - (see BBC report here)
-Fold the wrapper diagonally in half over the filling and press the edges of the wrapper to seal.
We are very lucky to live in his time. Seamus Heaney is one of the greatest living poets today in the English language and his words will last and last.
A kind light on our plight.
Time Fades Away was a sign of things to come musically for Neil Young, while Time Fades Away ventured into different music territory, his following two releases would continue the trend of being recorded live, but in the studio. Neil Young recorded the album Tonight’s The Night next in 1973. The album was inspired by the deaths of Crazy Horse guitarist Danny Whitten and Young friend/roadie Bruce Berry. For the album Neil Young put together a new backing group known as The Santa Monica Flyers, which was a band featuring the rhythm section of Crazy Horse and Nils Lofgren on guitar. The albums title track “Tonight’s The Night” mentions Bruce Berry by name and the track “Come On Baby Let’s Go Downtown” features vocals and guitar from Danny Whitten (the song was a live recording from 1970). The album is known for featuring darker subject matter and for its raw, often crude production style. The album was recorded live with no overdubs and was meant to capture the band in the moment, with or without mistakes. Neil had this to say of the production values in Shakey: A Neil Young Biography:
However, if you found that the phrase "write what you know" was somehow limiting or constricting to you, then I hope this helps somehow.
A U.S. International Trade Commission judge has sided with Motorola in a landmark dispute between two of the largest technology conglomerates in the world. The epic clash of the titans started in 2010 when Microsoft decided to effectively declare war on the world renowned smart phone and telecommunications company. Microsoft filed with the U.S International Trade Commission a dispute involving nine Microsoft patents that Motorola was believed to be infringing.
1209 ***D-IV/25/1995. “The Needs of a Free People: Reflections on the Oklahoma City Bombing.” First Amendment Course, The School of Law, Loyola University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (Incorporated in Item C-1995(4), above, pp. 198-206, in Item B-8, above pp. 73-84 (1997), and in Item B-11, above, pp. 97-108 (1999).)
Now, put all of those things together and you will find yourself listening to Wasting Light live. And that’s exactly what you can do thanks to the video taken from 606.
KG Is there anything else you would like our reader to know about you?
I know he will have a cold this week so I prepare.
On the way, they met the Cricket. They all had the same conversation with the Cricket.
Place your orange segments in your sterile jars, leaving an inch of head space, as they tend to float. Bring your liquid to a boil, then pour over the tops, leaving a half inch of space. Lids on tightly, and water bath.
I just finished my first draft of my first chick-lit novel, Welly-Booty-Goodness :)
The Statesman says tire slashing has been rampant in Hyde Park for 15 years, but I can personally attest that it’s been going on for at least 18 years. Back in 1993, when I lived in a decrepit apartment at the corner of 39th and Speedway, it wasn’t uncommon to see two or more cars with two or more slashed tires in the streetside parking lot. He never got me, though.
We stayed for about an hour. During that time, only one other kid appeared – a toddler who was probably 18 months old. At first my kids enjoyed having the place to themselves. They ran up the slides. They hopped from empty swing to empty swing. They scurried up the little climbing wall over and over. But soon the absence of other kids to watch and to play with left them bored and ready to leave.
It was pretty intense.
Step 2: Knead the lotus paste well and make 80g balls (or 150g if you think you can do it) . I had difficulty wrapping 150g of paste as my paste as very soft in comparison to my dough. I reduced the amount and decided to wrap them in the same way as I wrap Chinese beef pies - which is not the way to wrap moon cakes, but if you have trouble wrapping it the correct way, I suggest you do what I did!
That last self-deprecatory remark must be taken with a healthy pinch of salt, as anyone who's read A Rough Shoot can attest: it is as pure a thriller as a person could wish for. The narrator is the aforementioned Roger Taine, a Dorset salesman who rents 450 acres of rough shooting from a local farmer, killing game "purely for the pot". One autumn evening Taine is out on the shoot when he spies two men who he takes to be commercial poachers. Taine decides to teach them a lesson, and so from a range of eighty yards lets one of them "have a charge of No. 5 shot in the seat of the pants". Unfortunately, the man falls on a strange broad spike he'd been laying on the ground, and is killed. The man's companion flees, and Taine is left with a corpse on his hands.
I did leave with a bit of hope though when I thought about how they started last year. A 14-10 drubbing at the hands of the White Sox and an overall anemic opening series performance, which preceded a 30-15 start.
So, as organisations like SETI and NASA broadcast information concerning our anatomy, biology, systems of government and languages into the void in high detail, please wonder, though not for too long, what harm that information could do if it fell into the wrong tentacles.
My partner bought a bunch of smoked salmon from Costco and I was trying to find different ways of using it beyond breaking it up for fried rice. Trying to purpose the smoked salmon with things stocked in our fridge and pantries, I found a few recipes that required little additional ingredients. Most of them involved eggs and here is one of them:
The band made its film debut in the Bob Hope - Jackie Gleason comedy vehicle movie How to Commit Marriage (1969) and really shines in the film as a psychedelic-hippie rock band associated with the young people in the plot of the story. This fantastic group did a wonderful music video-style presentation in the film, performing their charming hippie anthem, A Child's Garden.
The campaign proposes that the Internet, supporters of the cause the following message to send to the Minister of Justice of Brazil, via email, text or share on Facebook: "The isolated Awa are fleeing for their lives as loggers, ranchers and settlers invade their land. Please use your authority to remove the invaders and keep them off the ground forever. "
What are your experiences with birth? At home or at the hospital?
So when you have educated them on the art of cooking and contributed to their independence, prop your feet up and enjoy ’cause when Mama’s happy everybody’s happy!
Market Trends Pvt Ltd
Siriuslover117: Fred Weasley.
12:30pm Team buses arrive (parking lot K at Cabrillo)
- Larsson’s family became his inspiration – he painted many family scenes from the kids playing dress-up to family picnics.
:: a glass of wine ::
Post Workout Shake:
I never wake up early but this morning I was up at 8 am to get the Sunday paper, clip coupons, and head to Walgreens. My Walgreens runs out of stock SO FAST!
But 20 children? Not so good because if I see what my university education and all the sundry trimmings are costing my father I would hate to think he had to make 20 of us. He would need to join the bank robbers to keep us at university.
Great knowledge from the darkness of the night.
kindled torch we clasp,
- Cross the river on the car ferry and then up up up out of the gorge.
Step Four: Tape the bottom with floral tape or secure with twine.
“What?!” I replied, my emotions alternating between pride and indignation. “I can’t believe that you lied to me!”
How was I supposed to answer? "Well, he should be a strong man. Not necessarily strong like being able to carry heavy things, though that is nice. I mean strong enough to support you when you're angry or sad or hurting. Someone who doesn't mind if you cry sometimes. Someone you trust enough to let see you cry. You should never be afraid to show how you're feeling or talk about why you're feeling sad."
Up until a few years ago, I thought a “meme” was either a creative spelling for “Mimi” or a mime that wasn’t spelled properly at all. I’m slow to catch on to most social zeitgeist trends out of choice and because I’m slowly turning into one of those old curmudgeons my parents are now. I’m nearly tragically unhip, though I do maintain presences on Facebook and WordPress (though not Twitter; I refuse to go down that road.)
.......sorry but life has been up to its usual rubbishy tricks lately resulting in no crafting or enthusiasm to do anything. Hubby is again out of work. He lost his job in June last year and managed to secure work in November for a six month contract. We had hoped the contract would be renewed but NO, not hubby's, so its back to the job centre!!!
Organic cosmetics offer women suffering from cancer a
I absolutely adore this little guy! He has grown so much everytime I see him, he and his parents live in Hart, MI so I don't get to see him in between his sessions to see how much he has grown. I remember his first session where he was pretty fussy and just adjusting to life, now... that smile and easy going personality... he is an absolute joy! Thank you Wilcox family for letting me share in preserving your memories of this special little guy!
**Recent reviews posted at 5 Minutes for Books (I enjoyed all of them a lot):
Some people add 1/2-1 t. turmeric to ramp up the “golden chicken soup” look.
I just discovered the Clorox Clean-Up Recipes for Fun Site. Whether you are looking for Wacky Science, Arts and Crafts, Kiddie Cooking, or Creative Cooking ideas this site has what you are looking for. They have several examples of activities in each category. I just browsed through and there are a ton of great ideas for us to try. I know that we will enjoy them all. I love when I find a new site full of fun activities for us to do that we can also learn from and work together as a family on.
The film has been plagued by tragedy involving it’s young actors.
I'll never understand love, infatuation or even adoration! I could write loads about it but never really get it?
Yes and no. If you think of an album as a “piece of art”, let’s be honest, are there that many albums falling under this categorization?
Whew! We made it. Feeling sad that it’s over? Ready for a nap? Going to share your thoughts on the Challenge during the Reflections post? Ready for Wednesday’s IWSG post? (Hey, you get Tuesday off! You can do it.)
I went to the gym today for an hour and I went grocery shopping. I played with my dog. I did practice singing a little but didn't record myself this time. That's all I've really done and it's almost 3:30.
UMNO has lost its credibility and the well-meant Malaysians will reject the party in the next general election.
I have seen worse hoarding, in fact much worse. What I find incredible is the scale of the hoarding in these pictures.
Yep makes finding that elusive PDF a thing of the past. Search, tag, browse. It’s like iPhoto, but for PDF’s. This is one that you have to pay for, but you can get a good deal if you buy it with Leap.
The list now includes Android, BlackBerry and other websites, such as ocbustracker.com.
Reviews can go either way, and sometimes they hang out in the middle. But when one is good ... it’s validation of all the hard work you put into a story; the long hours, the isolation, the emotion. You can sit back and really feel like you’ve done your job.
I think the really important thing at this point is to PIN THOSE SUCKERS DOWN. Otherwise tiny details can sometimes slither away from you and it's really hard to get them back. What's more, the very act of writing down your ideas makes them feel more concrete and get-at-able.
-- There is two kinds of music, the good, and the bad. I play the good kind.
So it is a film more or less stuck on the North and South sides of Koreaduring the war, and shows us vivid scenes from the POV of both. No one particular person or group is shown to be right, that is, the actual good guy vs. the bad guy scenario. Even the sharpshooter from what I think is the North side, the one they call Two Seconds (because you take a bullet and hear the crack of the gun two seconds after that), who actually happens to be a girl. I’m not entirely sure on the accuracy of that, given the rather male-dominated society of Korea, but hey, maybe they saw it like Israel does – use whatever advantage in war you have. So there’s this particular hill out there on the hotly contested border between North and South, and even while peace negotiations are supposedly being debated, the Hill is still a point of contention and both armies want it. That damn Hill has been taken and retaken by both sides for so long, matter of fact, that certain companies of the North and South armies have started this odd little tradition – in a bunker under the Hill, they leave things for eachother buried in the floor – photos, letters home, alcohol if you’ve got it, matches, smokes, even pranks. In the beginning this leads to the happiest moments of the movie – hey, I’m alive, they enemy hasn’t gotten me yet, and here, they left me some matches so I can have a smoke. Cool. Unfortunately it’s those same few celebratory moments that hurt the worst towards the end, when peace has finally finally been declared after three long years of nothing but endless fighting, that make the final battle for the ownership of that damned Hill that much worse. When you now know your enemies name and have shared a drink with him, at least in spirit if not in deed, seeing a Hill literally mounded of his dead is just the worst.
We have a problem with a tube under the kitchen sink, which is leaking and it was all wet under the sink. I took out the bin and the cleaning stuff which was in this kitchen unit and put towels in there to absorb the water. In the middle of the night I woke up because somebody rumbled in the kitchen. When I looked I found the bin laying on the floor and its content was spread out all over the kitchen floor !
Congrats Kylie!
"I don't know El ..."
As this point, you can make a list of foods with low glycemic index and prepare for a trip to the store. Now, you'll be gung ho at a point when you could otherwise be most vulnerable. Your enthusiasm over prospective change can help thwart the tendency to grab items off your old shopping list. If you are faithful to the list, you will be faithful to eating foods with low glycemic index, since that's all that should be in your house.
Fascinating to watch.
We continue to closely monitor Mother Earth as there are physical changes happening, and some areas are more prone to them than others. We are not allowed to stop those that are necessary, but will do all we can to alleviate any harm to you and keep extensive damage to a minimum. Conditions could well have been horrendous if the dark Ones had their way, but we have stopped their plans to induce catastrophes to reduce the population of Earth. We know many of you cannot comprehend that anyone could fall to that extent, but with the almost total loss of Light such souls have lost any feelings of compassion.
Then, there are the other blogs that I follow. They seem to fall into two categories, one is people who take much better photos of flowers than I could ever hope to take, mostly because they have the proper equipment for it. The other category is bloggers who are very well-educated as to the identities of the various wildflowers and they are far better educated than I am, so what I would post would be lacking.
He even has a storage area where the former kitchen cabinets now reside. The two gray bins are going back with me to Jacksonville the next time I come down. We gathered up all as many items as possible that my Dad either didn't like or wasn't needed in his place. The house was full of lighthouses, in the form of little statues, plaques, wall decor, dishtowels, etc. He wasn't too keep on keeping all of that. The decorations in the house were also pretty girly. Tea cups and saucers and tons of items with flowers. We deflowered the place :)
A. received a few used diaper covers, but they smelled like smoke. She did a soak and triple rinsed, but they still smelled smoky. She was looking for a way to get the smell out without damaging the diapers.
Three-Twelve looked at Seventy-one. She had a wild stare on her face, her eyes moving around the ceiling as she took in all the new information. Her mouth vacillated between smiling and frowning as her hands clenched and flexed in rapid succession.
My goodness, baby girls are sweet, aren't they?!
2. RAW episodes of various dramas from several countries are available to watch. This is a good alternative to Dramacrazy, EpDrama, KrDrama.org, etc. However, no subtitle/closed captioning is provided.
Jesus makes it clear in Matthew 5:17 that the law is good and not to be done away with. In other words, righteous and separated living is both commanded and promoted by Jesus Christ. Let’s go a step farther; SEPARATION WAS PROMOTED AND COMMANDED BY CHRIST. Revelation 2:2-3, which are the words of Christ given directly to John, commends the Ephesian church for taking a quite staunch stand against false doctrine and those who would pervert the church unto worldliness or compromise.
UPDATE: I'm home from doc and all is good & contractions will be coming & going but they aren't painful enough yet to be very productive! Will keep you posted & hopefully I still have a couple mroe weeks to go :)
Barry Norman, the one time film expert and presenter once said that it was nonsense that people were affected by violence in films. He made the classic mistake. What he should have said that he wasn’t affected by violence in films. Clearly some people are and it’s usually vulnerable people and it’s certainly true for children.
Asset Disregard - Most people rely on Medicaid for help on their responsibility to the dominos bismarck north dakota among the dominos bismarck north dakota in the dominos bismarck north dakota and interested in seeing some native animals and enjoying seeing them, you also get a much better idea of where home value of a particular area, you can stay in the dominos bismarck north dakota and corn. Biotechnology jobs can come in many varieties. Some are more developed than others, and some threatened.
Stacked on the kitchen table are high school assignments. Booklists, suggested reading lists, essay topics. Even a periodic table of the elements. I don’t remember having mounds this big freshman year. And Amy hates homework – she never does any extra work if she can help it, which she usually can. Amy’s smart – smarter than me, honestly. But that means she can usually do the bare minimum and still coast through her classes with a B average easy.
Everytime I try to fly, I fall
While you’re eating your french inspired sandwiches keep an eye on the upcoming presidential run-off election in France. It seems that incumbent, right-wing Sarkozy is a little behind in the polls, and his debate tomorrow night against his Socialist challenger, Francoise Hollande will probably be his last opportunity to pull in any votes in his direction. Voter turnout and participation is pretty dismal in the United States, but it’s reported that 1/3 of the population in France will be watching this debate (1). That’s a pretty high number in my opinion, so it’ll be interesting to see how many will actually go out and vote on May 6th, and if there will be a new President and party in power.
Jesuit-trained at Georgetown University. Greenberg was also a crony of
Watson...I was just trying to take a nap and the Hamish smooshes in the back.
9 humans
As an unmarried man, childless man, I have a freedom to spend time with my friends whenever they're free, and pretty much participate in whatever activity they're interested in doing. Now, I don't expect life to be exactly the same once I get married, and especially once I have kids, but I've never understood this phenomenon of men (and women) essentially disappearing from their lives with their friends, and only seeing them on a very infrequent and time-sensitive basis. There's always one person that dominates marriage relationships, and that person's friends inevitably become the other person's friends (by default); the friends of the other person just fall by the wayside, and are only see sporadically, and it's usually when the dominating person it out of town, or spending the day with one of their close friends.
Now, grammar is sometimes important. On the ballot are nine choices. Can I choose them all? Being a careful reader, I went to the ballot itself and read above the choices, "TO VOTE, COMPLETELY FILL IN THE OVAL NEXT TO YOUR CHOICE." I'm going to interpret this to mean CHOOSE ONE. But you just know that some people who do not read so carefully as I will choose two or more.
You all know I have 3 girls and 1 boy. I am new to all this boy stuff. Up until 3 years ago, my world revolved around dolls, dresses, tights, hair bows, and pink! Now it revolves around finding my son has pulled his pants down in the middle of the front yard so he can "pee all by myself, Momma," not caring that the neighbors are looking! It revolves around John Deer tractors, semi trucks, motorcycles, baseball bats, balls and gloves, cowboy boots, and Nerf guns.
Lancing – The Village of Lights
NO Patching & painting of façade walls
Most people watch talk shows on TV and wonder where they got the crazy people who argue and make fools of themselves for entertainment. As it turns out we were those crazy people.
I recently finished taking a little photography class at the local high school. It was a blast. I made some neat friends and learned lots of neat things about photography and my camera. I have always had an interest in photography but it wasn't until Brad bought me a nice camera that my interest really peaked.
The end of a conversation about workplace and playground politics...
Beat in strawberry puree, adding a few spoonfulls at a time until desired strawberry flavor and consistency is achieved.
One of my favorite shows: How I Met Your Mother. I watched loads of TV as a kid but as I got older I began to think of it as a distraction. I couldn’t help but feel guilty when I sat down to watch it. I couldn’t relax and would find something that I thought was more productive to do. Nonsense.
Utopians is a garage rock band led by singer Barbi Recanati. They usually sound like a wild rampage of 70s-like guitar riffs and distortions, especially on their new album Freak. This song is the exception - an intimate acoustic ballad with Spanish lyrics inspired by a cartoon character.
I had never purchased from Iglot but had done some YouTube research before and they have similar items to Make Up For Ever's liquid blush for a fraction of the price, I decided to get one of these also to wear as an everyday blush and use the MUFE on on special occasions. I also purchased a bright pink blush which can be toned down with the right brush.
Based on Mormon, Stephenie Meyer’s 4-book “vampire romance” series, the Twilight movie was released last week (Nov 21, 2008) in 3419 cinema theaters across the nation and grossed over $70 million its first weekend. It’s the hottest pop culture phenomenon since Harry Potter mania.
For the purposes of the document released to Brennan, there are four different income categories, as two low-income bands, up to 50% AMI, are conflated into one. (There are five income categories in the affordable housing Memorandum of Understanding.)
brings in a circus catch
Today’s forecast in my area of the country calls for a high temperature around 85 degrees. Tomorrow is projected to be 88, with the following day topping out in the low 90s. For me, it’s too damn hot already, and it’s only the end of May.
I am still in the running for the Salford Book Award with The Dead of Winter and I very much hope that it survives onto the shortlist for the Carnegie Medal. The Dead of Winter is part of a Kindle promotion on Amazon a the moment and it has been fun to see it sitting at No. 1 on the horror listings in Children's Books.
John the Baptist got his moniker because he was in the business of baptizing, but he was extremely leery of baptizing Jesus, the Lamb of God.
I promised some Gene Vincent so here is an uncharacteristic choice for me, Gene singing The Day The World Turned Blue featuring some cool footage of Gene arriving in London in 1969. He would be dead two years later.
The petition has sought a detailed investigation into the procurement of children through extortion, blackmail, threats and through bribery of government officials. It also asks the court to look into what it is calling the inhuman condition of children in various agencies.
In contrast, the Home Affairs Select Committee, chaired by Mr Vaz, has taken a far more structured approach with witnesses. Mr Vaz’s practice is to deal with one area at a time, giving the members of the Committee turns to ask about the specific areas identified before moving on to another part of the investigation. This seems to be a more logical way of proceeding, allowing MPs to follow up on and return to issues raised in the answers.
When her father’s called to serve in the Imperial army, free-spirited Mulan breaks tradition by taking his place. Mulan’s concerned ancestors send tiny guardian dragon Mushu to bring her back safely – if he can stop causing more problems than he solves. Eventually, Mulan proves her worth as a highly-skilled warrior, impressing fellow soldiers Ling, Yao, and Chien Po as well as Captain Li Shang. Soon, her true identity is discovered and she is sent away in disgrace. However, China’s future and those she loves depending on her, Mulan must find a way to convince the others that she has what it takes to be the best and defeat the Huns.
Easy Way
So obviously, you need to pick your moment.
All they are doing is applying copyright law to protect their interests in the "intellectual property" they own.
4. Draw a picture of my colleague- a funny one. I drew her as a little baby sitting on a throne with a crown on her head, screeching and screaming and throwing her toys! It really helped me to see her more lightly and less as intimidating.
The action of this apparatus will be readily understood. From the vertical shaft motion is communicated to the rake shafts, and a slower motion to one of the shafts carrying a pinion gearing into the circular rack. From this shaft a still slower motion is communicatcd to the other short shaft, carrying a pinion gearing into the rack, the two shafts being geared together by wheels of unequal sizes. It will thus be seen that when one of the rack pinions is thrown into gear with its shaft by means of its clutch, the whol apparatus will be made to travel slowly round the mash-tun, and the rakes will thus be brought to bear upon the whole of the “goods.” The direction of the motion of the apparatus, and the speed at which it is caused to travel, will depend upon which pinion is thrown into gear. This arrangement of travelling gear is similar to that adopted in the case of the chain rakes already spoken of.
The good news is that the SUN has been shining so it isn't the typical gray, but still! I'm getting OLD because none of this interests me!
May the blessing of peace and the reality of God's loving presence by yours today!
Being fashionable and stylish is not difficult. No, in fact it is rather simple when you focus on three parts to your wardrobe.
Here are all of the kids on our side of the family. Notice that Mateo doesnt have on his costume yet. I still wasn't sure he would wear his costume, so I had a Memphis football player as his Plan B costume.
For more info on the author please click on the links below:
BECKMAN FRIEDSON J. Flu vaccination – a moral responsibility for nurses? NurseWeek News, 2005. URL: http://www2.nurseweek.com/Articles/article.cfm?AID=18904
Boating on Kodai Lake
Racked: 07-29-2008
I am also a ‘jump in with two feet and think about it later’ kinda person! A lot of the time I will be doing an interview, presenting or, using last weeks example, teaching, and bang smack in the middle of it, it will dawn on me that I actually have an audience!
Park Street again. Steepness makes my chest burn. Straining cyclists overtake me and I watch the muscles of their calves clench and release and clench and release. When I am nobody I do not ride a bicycle so the bicycle of all the other girls I have been is locked away in Jack’s garage with other secret things. I do not go in there. Do not ask what is hidden inside in case he tells me. Do not look at his face.
I was silent a while, sensing a mild rebuke.
How do you guys feel about Endermen. I imagine that we all share the same feeling. Well, one person decided to create a little “tribute” to our dear friend, the Enderman. You may have seen some of his videos before. They are known to be quite…explosive. Let’s take a look.
The things that the BFG says and the way he says them are beautiful. He may be uneducated in the sense of schooling but he has a raw knowledge that cannot be taught but can be learned. Such brilliant words in the BFG's vocabulary are, "bundongle," "chiddler," and "phizzwizard."
Okay, so what have I been up to in the classroom? Well, for 100s day, I never got to make those cute little 100 year old people from Finally in First. So we made them when we started talking about Ben Franklin in our Reading series. We talked about how things have changed through the years. I wanted them to write what they thought the world would be like 100 years from now. Here's a couple pictures of their people and their writing.
These days, Abdullahi looks anything but downtrodden. She adores fashion (which can be quite an expensive habit, even in Kano) and goes a little starry-eyed when listing the hoped-for qualities of her soon-to-be-found husband. She may not be romantic but can’t help dreaming big.
I'm not sure if my Laura Geller Spackle melted a bit in transit, but it's much thinner than I thought it would be. I've heard people say this is like a thicker silicone primer, but mine's really thin! (Would putting it in the fridge do anything, or just be really stupid?) It appears to have shimmer in my swatch, but I didn't notice that I had a sparkly face when I used this.
The initiative also needs more volunteers, because that’s how we’re going to win this battle. The biotech industry may outdo us in funding ability, but we as consumers still outnumber them. Pamm Larry, the California grandmother who started this initiative, is correct when she says we need to reach every single California community—large and small.
You’re welcome and Happy Sunday.
This is what Easter is. It is hopping between two opinions. It is trying mix the Pesach with spring festival customs of the heathen. It is another golden calf. Worshipping YHWH in accordance with heathen rites.
Imagine the Mayor of Port of Spain giving permission for the square to be used on a day the House is sitting and the police not giving permission for a public meeting but still did not disperse the crowds? And to crown it all, the PM “ramajaying”, as one newspaper put it, to the crowd during the tea break. And in the weekend’s Guardian interview with Clevon Raphael, Neil Parsanlal didn’t know what was the underlying cause of crime in this country? I’ll give it to you free Neil…
At 10 p.m. Friday it’s The Santa Fe Opry (country music as the good Lord intended it to sound), and same time Sunday it’s Terrell’s Sound World (free-form weirdo radio). Both also stream at www.ksfr.org.
My child will never do that….
At thirteen years of age, while passing through Farmington meadows, in the depths of winter, in a blinding snowstorm, I became so chilled and overcome with cold that I could not travel. I crawled into the hollow of a large apple tree. A man in the distance saw me, and, realizing the danger I was in, hastened to where I was. Before he arrived at the spot I had fallen asleep, and was almost unconscious. He had much difficulty in arousing me to a sense of my critical condition, and promptly had me conveyed to my father’s house, where, through a kind Providence, my life was again preserved.”
And Christ, it’s a game that can back up its threats.
Hello 2012! Welcome.
I am glad they are brave and capable
Meanwhile, it may be worth storing some beers for yourself, preferably in a cellar that is well out of daily reach. A very good article on cellaring beer can be found here. It recommends a storing temperature of 13-15 degrees Celcius, somewhat higher than the 7-10 degrees prevailing in the Kulminator cellar. But then again you may not manage to keep your stock for thirty years.
As I question the band members about other specific tracks, more and more information comes out. For instance, track five, “Summer/Translation Blues/Summer Reprise,” an intense medley, with enchanting tempo alterations and Hart’s fiery interrogation of an undisclosed female character, has deep and personal meaning. According to Hart “The song is about the power people wield over you, how they can make you feel so shitty inside, and that same power you have over others, and how the perpetrator can just walk away without feeling anything or thinking twice about it.”
I am hapy to report that my homeland Hungary finally got the one-up on Australia. Parliament recently passed a law introducing a dog tax. The law stipulates that autochthonous Hungarian races, such as the vizsla, the puli or the komondor, are exempt. The idea is, of course, to promote the population growth of these natives at the expense of the immigrant varieties.
I remember long ago on European nights like this
3/16/12 I am thankful for
Georgetown University has just announced that Kathleen Sibelious, is going to be the 2012, graduation speaker. Oh come Cardianal Wuerl, what will it take to say that this aint a Catholic school anymore?
I managed to run a really steady pace between miles 5 – 21 (8:30 ish) then at mile 21 I decided I would try and let go. I had a feeling I’d finished the climb and I was pretty sure the path down to Greenock (and the Clyde) would be pretty much downhill from there on in.
I’m not even a chick and I am excited about this. It’s possible this is the first movie my wife and I are equally looking forward to seeing. This is a pretty ominous promo, which is very encouraging.
That was the gist of things. I told him it was time to meet his sweet death.
. .well, essentially, it’s because when nature wraps up a mineral in one of her plants for us, it comes complete with all it’s co-factors – those things which help it to work and be effective in our body AND is recognized as a compatible substance. This is contrary to what one can buy in a bottle – an isolate of some kind, manufactured in a laboratory, and once in the body, is not recognized nor usable, and in fact is generally harmful and a burden for the body to have to expend resources to have to eliminate.
So many memories.
He, who I know named Kim Junsu, just walks out from his house. He rubs his arms while shudder in cold. I look at the sky for nth time today. Sun doesn’t show itself since morning. It’s cloudy and drizzle begins to pour. Suddenly, the urge to hug that fragile body and make it warms come to me.
A stunningly beautiful and compelling story that captured my heart from the very beginning- While He Was Away will not only pull you into a wonderful love story; it will give you an even greater appreciation for the ones that you love! This is definitely a must-read for the summer :)
I set Seja down on the floor with some kix cereal. I knew that they would end up all over the floor and yet I let her do it. She did pick about half of them back up, the other half the dog came in and ate.
For a detailed study, I would suggest the Anchor Bible (AB) by John Reumann, NICNT by Gordon Fee, or NIGTC by Peter O’Brien. For an intermediate study, try Word (WBC) by Gerald Hawthrone, or Baker (BECNT) by Moises Silva. If you have time to read and sift through all the details, then that’s fine.
Please read the comments from other BSF attendees and leaders in this article from Lighthouse Trails Research.
The walls are painted this color: (it's actually a very pale neutral green gray)
In case you’d like a better look , here’s the trailer:
I’ve been back in the states for about five days now. Life seems to be in a whirlwind state getting settled back into the everyday norm. My body decided it doesn’t like jet lag. While dealing with the time difference my sinuses decided to rage a war in my head. I can’t really complain too much though because Ireland was well worth the visit. My fear of not fitting well into the plane seat was justified and I think that if I was not sitting next to my brother it would have been an issue. I still have a long way to go in my goal to lose weight. This just gives me more of a push to keep going on my journey. Hopefully next time I fly I will fit comfortably. The flight attendants on both flights were very nice. I asked the attendant who greets you as soon as you walk onto the plane if I could have a seatbelt extender. They discretely handed me one no questions asked. Everyone was friendly and I did not feel judged at all. Thank you United Airlines!
I wish you would have chosen life, I wish I hadn’t of missed your phone call that night, maybe things would be different, maybe you would be here still. All these things they haunt me. I think about you when life gets hard, I talk of you when others are in need of council, I think of your mom, dad and sisters and the pain they must be in, the only thing I haven’t done is honestly tell people how much this hurts. How a year later I can’t forget, I can’t forgive, I can’t put stitches in a wound that doesn’t want to heal.
“It’s hard not to be romantic about baseball” could have easily been the best line in a baseball movie in sometime and basically summed up last summer’s great movie and Brad Pitt’s best movie in a while, Name Your Link">Moneyball.
‘Why he didn’t run? Why he dare to stare at my eyes?’The man asks in his mind.
This month my graduate student Laura Kuper and I published a new study in the Journal of Sex Research that reports on data we collected from an online sample of transgender individuals. Laura is serving as a guest blogger to describe what was found in this study.
Today was a particularly challenging day in the classroom. Not that there were behavioural issues that I couldn't handle, or too much work to cover. As normal, there were spats to sort out and social groups to negotiate in the playground; the challenging issue of keeping everybody working and happy regardless of ability level or concentration span; a threatening wet-day timetable. But every teacher worth their salt faces these situations every day. Every teacher I know is just as much a social worker and parent-figure as they are an educator.
So, few weeks back, as I was in the area, I decided to actually go to Plavi podrum and enjoy it on my own. This iconic place is famous for sea food and great selection of wines as the owner, Mrs. Kramarić, is one of the master somellier’s in the country and a well respected authority on wines (and food, of course)
Twenty million in a day is great, a milestone for most. The other day, Chris locked in ten times that amount. Granted, he crushed the single day record, but still. It’s representative of the boom.
Kunt has sacked me
Now that I have a method of commanding my Hamster, the question is - what to say to it? It is a Chinese hamster, so it might not speak good English...
Love is not the right word-
Yeah, I know better.
Mix wet ingredients first, then dry and finally add your raisins and chocolate chips.
I’m another week closer to the race and getting nervous. I ran four days for 30 mins in the past week, but it’s not quite enough. I need to ease myself into a long run once a week until I’m at about the 5-6 mile range (which they recommend despite the 12-mile race distance because the obstacles will break up the continuity), but I’m running out of time. There’s just two and a half months left and I’m still struggling find time for training 5 days a week. When I did train this week, it was strictly cardio; I haven’t strength trained all week. I’m more nervous about being in shape for the distance anyway. The worst case scenario is I have to bypass an obstacle because I lack the strength to complete it, but if I can’t keep up with my team during the running, it’s all a lost cause. And so I head into a new week of training…
To put my down-time to use, I've been madly writing Christmas cards getting them ready to send by Dec. 1st.
So if you are saving all the good stuff for the book what are we supposed to read about now? I can't wait for some book! My 4 year old son learns his sense of immediate gratification from me!
JIMMY KIMMEL HOSTING THE EMMYS
To those of you who have been linking up, I've got a quick question. Do you like that the top three is decided by the number of clicks on the link? Or would you prefer something else? I feel bad for those of you who have linked up crazy-good projects later in the week and don't get a lot of clicks. Is that just the way the cookie crumbles, or is there a better way? If you've got a genius idea, let me know!
such as boots, blankets and bullet
Dear Mom's Best Products,
At this point, the writer flings on a mangy dressing gown and hurtles down the passage to capture the new ideas before they take wing into the stratosphere.
In the case of MAS and AirAsia, it need not be at the expense of each other or encroaching on each other s brand identity.
My artwork wildly ranges and includes face painting and make up art work. Yesterday I had to create some zombies and because of short notice and being pressed for time I was unfocused and could not be more unfocused on perfection then getting it done in time. I always kick myself for being unfocused but somehow I always get the job done, with satisfied customers. Here is my focused with unfocused pieces!
The elliptical hinged top raised on circular tapering legs ending in casters. Height 29 1/2 inches (74.9 cm), width 53 inches (1.35 m), depth 26 1/2 inches (67.3 cm).
I mean, I DO have legs, I am in decent (not great) shape, and can manage to glide myself around on the (flat) cross country tracks. I'm not saying I am a good cross country skiier, and I get terrified on a downhill slope, but I have done it a few times. I'm willing to give it another go.
After our tour, we drove across town to Church Brew Works. Here we were greeted by Brant, the head brewer, and given a quite thorough tour of the facility and a great presentation on the brewing process. We even got to see the yeast lab. After a brief taster, it was time to wrestle through rush hour traffic and head back home.
Used to be I knew all about computers. I knew how big they were and all the software. I could have written manuals for the Mac. Alas that time is long past and now I feel like a hundred year old spinster bringing her dog to the computer repair store, but not her computer. I really hate computers.
There is an army of people in America who have concluded that the enemy is the government and are determined, senator-by-senator, representative-by-representative, to reshape the federal government and to do so at the state and local level as well. It’s already been happening in primaries around the nation as Tea Party candidates challenge and defeat their opponents.
about the price of gold,
For more information about this topic:
So why not have a go yourself and win a FREE Digi from Stamp n doodle, post a picture of your card using Yo-yo in the Linky tool below, and have a wonderful St Patrick's day!
Ithaca, New York, April 20
A girl can dream right?
* 1 cup light coconut milk
How the eff did that happen?!
But even the strong ones can be surprised,
I start again
I liked the book for its bold and different narrative but after some time it tends to become very depressing. At the same time what is mentioned in the story is the stark reality of relationships and family values. At one place I ended up laughing really loud where a name is mentioned as “Elder Brother Goddess Red”. You need to know the politics of state of Haryana in India and a bit of Hindi to be able to understand this.
Thank God that Ron Paul has finally renounced that disrespectful joke that appeared in his newsletter in 1992 about how the riot ended on May 1, 1992 because the looters stayed home to await their welfare checks. What a scandal. Some things are too sacred to joke about.
About 10 minutes before you want to eat, remove the ice cream from the freezer to soften. Set your tart on an upturned tin – this should help to remove the sides. Slide the base carefully off with a knife and put on a serving plate.
Three local schools participating worked on diverse environmental projects:
Someone working minimum wage, or two minimum wage jobs, and trying to support a child while being taxed is going to be forced to do without something basic, and adequate food will quite likely be one of the many sacrifices. Anyone making $100,000 probably isn't going to need to skip a meal due to finances even at a higher tax rate. Depending on where they live, the yacht might have to wait, but so be it.
“SUARAM wants the police and the government to stop all the harassment to stop the people from practicing their fundamental liberties. SUARAM urges the government to look into the demands of the Bersih 2.0 instead of clamping down on their freedom of expression and assembly. If the Prime Minister Najib is sincere in listening to the people and practicing the slogan “People First”, then he should not curb people’s rights and freedoms.
Salad:
A more light-hearted theory – my own – is that the morning after the kind of night where a woman wears eyeliner, the kind of night that includes a passionate throw-down, we all look a little like Alice Cooper.
In any event, here is my family's favorite CC cookie recipe. This is a rich, chewy, full of chocolate chunks cookie, with a generous pinch of Oh.My.God.
Malika Zarrar: He can go get cured at his family’s place or in a mental asylum. He can go to hell and take the other wife with him. What they are doing is a deliberate sin. Sexual relations between a man and a woman is a form of worship.
This is the only time Jesus is called an apostle.
Hello Everybody!
Noted the slender and jagged threads of lightning as sudden and fast
2. I do unto myself as I would have myself do unto me.
I served three flavors, which I'll cover in three different blog posts. First up: Carrot Cupcakes with Cream Cheese Frosting. I originally found the recipe on a food blog, but then I spotted the same cupcake recipe in a past issue of Cooks Illustrated. I was missing one of the spices called for in the recipe, so I substituted pumpkin pie spice -- it contained all of the spices listed in the recipe.
Champagne is best served as cold as you can get it without putting it in the freezer, although that can be strictly a matter of individual taste. The coldness helps maintain the bubbles after opening.
I was just reflecting on how in the past, any behavior that was considered not socially acceptable was labeled a mental illness. Of note: Back in the days of United States slavery, drapetomania, characterized by a slave’s desire to escape his/her master (and considered treatable by beating); Soviet Russia had sluggish schizophrenia, characterized by political dissent; Until relatively recently, homosexuality was considered a mental illness. Facts like these give the anti-psychiatry movement ammunition. I mean, it was enough to make me wonder: where do we draw the line between socially unacceptable behavior and mental illness?
So how can we have a proper discussion about how white people are the ones destroying ourselves, and the memes driving it? Well, clearly we'll have to send anyone in Nazi uniform or anyone obsessing about goblins out of the room. Even someone obsessing about Muslims or Hispanics will be useless and disruptive in this discussion. Quite as those obsessing about the Jews. But the last one is worse since it will take the whole room into red alert mode (as described above).
As covered in last week’s disturbing BBC2 documentary This World: The Shame of the Catholic Church, in 1975, a young boy by the name of Brendan Boland accused Roman Catholic priest Fr Brendan Smyth of sexually abusing him. As a result, the boy was taken with his father to the intimidating surroundings of a monastery for questioning. He was then separated from his father and subjected to what can only be described as an inquisition, consisting of a gruelling cross-examination by three priests in the presence of canon lawyer John (now Cardinal Seán) Brady. Brendan Boland says in the documentary that he was alone and scared: he didn't know what was going to happen; he didn't know what questions they were going to ask him. He was just 14 years old. Cardinal Brady noted down the answers and the transcript is available to view (excerpt above and below; or forward to 32:50 on BBC iPlayer).
It is a typical movie, but as I watched it I got the feeling that I had seen it before. First, “savages” attack a homestead and kidnap a young girl. Second, her uncle, a hardened veteran and old “savage” fighter goes after her. Third, a young sidekick who cares for the girl travels by his side. Fourth, the uncle says he will kill her if she has turned “savage”.
The aroma has an unmistakably sweet cherry syrup smell. A little cinnamon and spice as well, mixed with an all around cherry and apple crumble aroma. The body is slightly thin and watery but the flavour is just right. Some coffee and dark malt roasted bitterness, a little marzipan and almond flavour with a slight dairy milk sweetness. The finish is short and sweet with a big (big) cherry flavour, which leaves the mouth dry and wanting more. It's a perfectly acceptable beer, and a really interesting take on a Mild, I usually find Milds a little boring - and this one manages to make an intriguing style and concept. If I was Dunham though, I would try make this into a stout - say about 6/7% with the cherries.
and he kept playing the dream.
I am fickle though so it will probably all change around within a few months.
Ladle the vindaloo into bowls and sprinkle jalepeno pieces over the top
Again, where does all this fit into the big classification system? No clue. Not sure if I care right now, but I had such a great time delving into Star Trek and classic Doctor Who that I thought I’d try out a few anime – both movies and TV – just to see what hooked me and what didn’t.
I’d made prior promises to the young work guy, though… and so at 9pm left my cosy den of great food and quirky new people and drove back to the coast… to a dank, uninspired hole in the wall filled with women (apparently he only has 4 male friends, and their shared enjoyment of grabbing each other’s groin was supposed to be the thing that convinced us that they weren’t gay), 90% of whom had grown up on the coast, and heard variations of the following at least 4 times through the evening, ‘Why’d you eva leave the place mate… I don’t get it. It’s f’ing paradise hear. PARADISE!!!’ .
As I mentioned in my last post I've been rather bored tonight so I just decided to check out some of my favourite blogs. It turns out my man Retronic over at Retro-Teque has been on an uploading tear which has resulted in several great library records and compilations becoming available online. One of his most recent posts is "Hard Hitter" by Keith Papworth, an album that I have been lusting after for quite some time.
My mother has arrived and has met the little girl…good luck is all I have to say. She’s a first time granny!
I will have so much fun reuphostering them all.
What would a ninja wizard do?
I look into her smile, into her face and into her soul.
Thomas said that the intiative would initially boost regional trade by 10%, and eventually by 50%.
Mr. Think turned to his communion and struck the hot iron with decisive resolve in his voice. They were listening now with eagerness of an avid learner.
Parameters for this week’s screen:
“Y O U RB O S S; M a r v i n would like to add you to his or her BlackBerry Messenger Contact List.’
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION (CDC). Prevention and control of influenza: recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP). MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 2004; 53 (RR-6): 1-40.
Way to go Denyse. You have now joined a long line of failed prophets!
Blues: BG01, BG05
This whole discussion sends my mind back to one of my favorite economics jokes, surprisingly enough courtesy of Jim Henson’s famed Muppets. In the opening scenes Muppet Christmas Carol, Gonzo (in the role of the earnest Bob Cratchet) chides Rizzo the Rat for eating the wares for sale in his apple cart. Rizzo’s classic response, “I’m creating scarcity…Drives the price up.” (If you’re too impatient, just skip to the 3:30 mark.) I guess what was true in this Victorian-era flashback remains true today.
Thanks for looking-a marathon day! You should see the state of my dining room table! Will tidy it up in the morning! Off to watch Take Me Out now and have some tea :)
2. The bouncer is a blonde girl.
DeGeneres
While a trip seems like a good method of introducing a country, there is too much text spent tying the travel plot line together, and too little information about Canada itself. For example, the travelers visit the Museum of Civilization in Ottawa. “We walked through the Canada Hall, which goes through a thousand years of Canadian history. Cal zoomed through his historical tour at warp speed, then spent the rest of the time going up and down the escalators. Gran took two hours for her tour. She came out looking bug-eyed.” At the surface a “personal” tour of Canada seems appealing, however a longer book with more detail, designed to be browsed will be more enjoyable.
Easter Sunday Birthday: righteous day
James, you take care of yourself as much as you want others to care for you. And listen as much as you speak. And be happy.
Because of the relatively young age and digital understanding of this community the primary mode of communication is online. This includes primarily (but not exclusively) the muddernation, various sports related forums, Facebook and Twitter.
I used a similar treatment on this next image where we have the lovely Iveta in the background, having her picture taken by one of the other photographers. I love the shape of Holly's body as revealed by the cape, I have tried to get other models to produce a similar shape using the same cape many times since, and have failed miserably on each occasion. It's just a shame about the poor background and burnt out windows.
"For, all day, the wheels are droning, turning,---
They did assassination movies and books about George W. Bush. There’s a picture. I don’t know if you’ve seen the picture: Bush and Obama standing side by side while a memorial service is going on, prayer taking place. Bush is appropriately bowing his head. Obama is looking up at his son: God — or, if you want, his father. But it’s not an accident. Now, some people have said Obama looks like he’s trying to figure out what he’s gonna wear on the golf course later. But, no. Obama has this habit of looking up and looking up above everyone and Bush is bowing his head. Obama’s eyes are closed looking up. That’s quite striking. I think it’s quite, quite telling.
At nighttime, the light automatically came on and lasted all night long. I loved the blue light because it lends a very soothing touch to the room. I can't wait until they add some boy SolPals, I know my little boy wouldn't want one with a flower or star. Maybe a football or a car.
We'd barely sat down and taken the first mouthful when he sat up straight and looked me in the eye.
…I had on a really comfortable, flattering outfit that I felt really confident in. How often does that happen? That’s like the fashion trifecta or something, isn’t it? Plus, I got three compliments, which boosted my spirits even more.
I often asked for thyroid tests. Both parents needed thyroid meds and it was just a matter of time that I needed them, I was sure! I read every word on Thyroid symptoms..each word was ME, but tests always came back that I was within normal range. My blood sugar was normal, my Cholesterol normal...so WHY WASN'T I NORMAL!
We packed up the Stroller with the camera, sunglasses, shoes (just in case), chap stick, phone, wallet and sunscreen! We took the long way to town! This Momma needs to take the long way! We made it to the Market where we purchased a few items, but most importantly we purchased Savannah a baby cone!
So, if an out of print books is offered at over retail on Amazon.com, or simply not available there, I don't give up. There are some other places I check:
More info about Dry The River
Isn't it rather odd that publishers consider the people who produce the main component of their product to be doing something else most of the time? Isn't it rather dodgy to build a multi-million dollar industry on a bunch of people whose attention is usually somewhere else? And is there any other industry that is so dismissive of its suppliers?
We vacation in Cancun in July, return to the Hotel Room after a hot day of laying in the sun drinking margaritas. A Christmas Story is on the TV (in Spanish) in the background.
Security renovations at the homes of Cabinet ministers are done by the department of public works and have to be declared to Parliament.
He sells home decor and accessories.
A cross-country trip to meet her father forces Anna to face the reality that hope and love are not options for her kind. When she confronts her
well, think about it, if everything went the way you wanted it to…
Here’s John’s crepe. (Actually, technically, the savory square dinner ones are called “galettes” and the sweet triangular dessert ones are called “crepes,” but I can’t stop calling all of them crepes. That’s just what comes out of my brain.) The photo I took of mine turned out too dark to salvage, but John’s looks appetizing:
Do you make a special breakfast for the first day of school?
One time the med staff and I were waiting for EMS to come in with a kid who'd fallen off his skateboard and hit his head. Of course he wasn't wearing a helmet. We were just standing around when one of the Spanish translators came in saying,
in her flight
March 25 @ Ultra Festival, Miami
A member of our church had been involved in the Brownsville Revival. She told me many stories about the revival that happened there & the anointing that she received from there. Whenever she went up for prayer her body would shake & eventually she would, fall to the floor.
Sharpening a Pocket Knife
Preheat oven to 425 F. Line a rimmed baking sheet with aluminum foil and spray with nonstick cooking spray.
And supremacy weighs heavy on the day
FRIENDS WITH BENEFITS (2011)
Ah, the 80's. It's like I never left :D
to reel you in or catch red herrings
I suspect he shortly thereafter had a bath in the tub.
One of the possible conclusions from this experience could be:
This question is kind of hard for me! I really don't look to certain people for style inspiration. I find it more in the clothes themselves. When I was growing up though, I thought Betsey Johnson was the coolest person in the world. She was unapologetically off-the- wall and has been doing brights, prints, and neons since day one. I've always been more drawn to funky/quirky style than classic looks. As I've gotten older, I've become a little more "buttoned up" and find myself dressing slightly more conservatively. I think Meredith Melling Burke is the perfect mix of
The kids decided a few weeks before Christmas that they were going to do a play for us on Christmas Eve. So, they spent their free time writing, typing, and rehearsing. Isaac played the part of Santa.
Ten years after his wife and daughter are brutally murdered, a man (Butler) embarks on a flashy killing spree to extract vengeance not only on the killers, but also on the ambitious district attorney who let his concern over conviction rates supersede the pursuit of justice (Foxx) and on the entire court system. However, even after he has been caught and put in isolation in a maximum security prison, the murders continue in ever-more brutal and elaborate ways.
I won’t deny.
We are also authorized users of the US Post Office Co-Palletization program that combines your mail on the same truck with other mailers that are going to further reaching destinations when you don’t have enough mail to merit your trucking directly by yourself. This means full trucks, postage savings and saved resources.
Nice piece, right? I loved this bit:
“If the towers had been reduced to 20 or 25 stories, it would have been possible” . . . “Environmental impact studies for Atlantic Yards predicted that Ratner’s project would cast shadows “for most of the … day” during the spring and fall, and through the afternoon in the summer. In the winter months, light will be “severely” diminished.
Try this using the English debt level as a reason to ‘redistribute’ wealth via ‘requisitions’ of wealth from the wealthiest. ‘Requisition’ ALL that wealth of the riches but 20 million of the top 1% of England’s citizens – that should cover everything. Even 20 million is an unthinkable sum to the 99%, but given that some of these people are worth near billions, you’d imagine how up in arms these 1% types would about having ONLY 20 million. The 99% cannot even imagine having 2 million, so either the Plutocracy Bastille gets torn down with the government alongside them, or the confiscation by the government occurs. Capitalism with socialist limits is the only wy to distribute weakth and prevent extrem sequestration of financial resources. When debt is killing England, the 99% should not have to pay the bills and the 1% who live in extreme luxury with massive sequestered funds not put to any use or to help alleviate interest levels by removal of debt, should have a sense of patriotism to give up that wealth to clear England’s debt instead of selfishly running off with the money to tax havens or keeping silent while the country gets deeper in debt – the citizens make up the country so if the country is going down, it is ubconscionable for the 1% to sit still and then migrate when the country falls apart. In that case the government might as well confiscate those extyreme funds since the citizen has no interest in the country anyway and would watch the country fall like an ENEMY, not helping out.
“Mrs. Archer, I doubt the gaseous eruptions are ferric in nature. What does he eat?”
He eventually ‘compromised’ by limiting his playing hours to between 12 – 1pm and 6 – 7pm each day, but according to one resident Chong Liling who posted on MP Alex Yam’s Facebook, though the playing frequency has decreased, the volume has gone up by a notch.
have to admit they are so much more fun then model airplanes.
“Here’s another of God’s miracles!” I rejoiced, sharing her story with Neli-Beli and her family who waited beside me.
(Daddy picked out the potty seat hehe)
One common theme was echoed. The US has subsidized the housing market to the point that it had a massive heart attack. Low down payment mortgages subsidized by taxpayers is a culprit in creating a housing bubble along with streamlined underwriting. Fannie, Freddie and the FHA had underpriced mortgage insurance and captured the residential mortgage market. All this was done in the name of “affordable housing” and “access to ownership.” Throw in the mortgage interest deduction to encourage bigger and bigger “McMansions,” and we have a problem.
According to Mazibuko, "an open tender process was followed in awarding the contracts" and "no possible conflicts of interests exists".
Katty Kay got the correct answer for a total of $8,000
You grab at anything in your reach, and if it is something you really want you will roll to get it. You're obsessed with your wipes case...it has Nemo on it. Needless to say, changing your diaper has become quite a challenge! haha
I put the baby down and stroked his hair so he could sleep.
Back to the quote above: I consider this phenomenon of people (often men) losing their individuality and friends once they become part of a relationship - especially a serious relationship - to be rather disconcerting, and to be not only a factor, but a MAJOR factor in the high incidence of infidelity and divorce. Men and women cannot get everything they need from one relationship; they can get sex, love, intimacy, friendship, and much more, but that's still not everything. Men and women have friends in the first place because those friends share their interests, and so they can talk about things and enjoy things together that others are not necessarily privvy to.
I was nervous about getting because
GAH!!!!!!!
Many times I send our Vegas Weddings couples an email asking them how they met, what’s special about their fiance, why did they decide to come to Vegas to get married, etc. Here is one of the letters I received that is so cute that I wanted to share it with you unedited! Francois and Lisa met through a mutual friend, Krystal and I’ll let them tell the rest!
And if we don’t pass this plan, does he intend to keep the waste and inefficiency, out of spite?
Derived from a higher authority and natural law. Property rights existed independently and BEFORE the Constitution.
Level 4: MP Cost: 15, Attacks up to 4 enemies 3 times, Damage: 198%, 2% chance to stun the enemy for 1 seconds.
Day 4 was my first day at work on the Reset and it went pretty well. I ran out of time in the morning and had a Shakeology for breakfast and it kept me surprisingly full all the way until lunch. Lunch was the LifeGift Joint Council Meeting so I had my lentils and salad while everyone else had their awesome looking Pot Belly sandwiches but it’s okay. The lentils weren’t as good the second day by half. They were actually a little gross. The lime that made them so great on Day 3 was blech. Dinner though…OMG coconut oil is my new favorite cooking tool. There were veggies stir fried in coconut oil plus quinoa and a salad and it was AWWWWWWESOME. The coconut oil made the veggies taste amaaaazing.
Set of directions, to be read as follows:
Arranged by Nelson Riddle
Boulder Beer Co Boulder Sweaty Betty Blonde German Weiss Beer
And us
This Is a Scandal
8. -
In the below illustration, both fabrics to be connected are knit in stockinette, and the knit side of the fabric is meant to be seen when the garment is worn. Accordingly, both fabrics are being held with their purl sides facing outwards, which means that their knit sides are rubbing against one another as the fabrics are being held front-to-front.
A law to end ‘libel tourism’ and protect free speech will be published today. The Defamation Bill will shake up antiquated libel laws to prevent wealthy individuals and corporations – often based abroad – using courts here to silence critics.
Simple Fractions – A pizza is shared between pirates on a beach and in a boat. Children tap each slice to feed the pirates on the beach, who walk away as they are fed. They are then asked to select the fraction that indicates how much remains for those in the boat. A six-sliced pizza might first feed 2 pirates on the beach, and then the child would need to select 4/6 to show the remainder. If they are correct, the pirates in the boat cheer, eat the pizza and row away. An incorrect answer will cause a cannon ball to sink their boat. If children have forgotten how many slices they started with (necessary to indicate the denominator), a faint image remains behind to help with counting.
…a short amount of time passes…
Friedman: only because people are
BeaArthur22: I find toddlers psychically repulsive.
I have a confession.
I've never sewn with oilcloth and wasn't sure how much fabric I'd need for the project, so I thought I'd give the DIY kit a try.
reminded us to seek joy
Feeling muddled and overwhelmed with work drove me to take action. OK, my to-do list ran to three pages but it was down on paper and out of my head, which consequently felt a lot clearer. I noted the day that each item needed to be completed by and worked through them in priority order rather than switching backwards and forwards between tasks in a state of panic. As a result, I felt more in control and a lot less anxious that I was going to overlook something important.
Next was off to the reception, where I went straight for the buffet table because I hadn't eaten all day. The place was packed and the line barely moving, and unfortunately prevented me from talking to Archbishop Dolan again. By the time I spotted him, he was already leaving. He gave a general wave in my direction and then a cop escorted him out the door.
So, are you there yet?
Who sent Jesus? Two distinct eternal Beings—The LORD GOD, and His Spirit.
May she guide me to the healthy food, the water, and the things that nourish this temple of mine.
On Thursday 15th police found the bodies of suspected thieves Luxolo Mpontshane, 25, Mabhuti Matinise, 20, and Sivuyile Rola, 28. They were allegedly kidnapped by community members and tortured for nine hours after they were suspected of stealing a plasma television set.
4. It’s cheap! Some perma-season cast iron can be quite pricey, but the ones I use were so far within my student budget I couldn’t believe it. I paid $25 (that’s just over $20 USD) for three pans (10”, 6”, 4”). I also have a griddle that cost me $12 and a wok that cost me $15. I cannot believe the price of this stuff, especially given that it lasts a lifetime.
* Stove Top,
Richard Kadrey introduces us to Stark as he emerges from eleven years of pure Hell.
80ml vegetable oil (original recipe uses 100ml)
BloodEagle spoke about Star Wars: The Old Republic, his issues with it, and his hope that some of those issues get fixed soon. He also spoke about his time in Tribes:Ascend, and his anticipation for Mass Effect 3.
I'm not saying that everything needs to be done in the utmost manner of politeness, but there does deserve to be some simple respect, even when the stakes are high. Maybe especially when the stakes are high. But somewhere we seem to have forgotten that if you're going to tread on someone in any arena that they will make it their mission to take you down. And they, too, have long memories. Even armies who are bent on killing each other understand that once you've defeated your opponent, you have to give them some grace in defeat, or it will come back to haunt the victors.
His political career saw him become a top-ranking ANC official in the Department of Foreign Affairs (1998). Even then this gangster found it hard to stay out of prison, as it was while he was working as an official in this department that he got himself arrested again, on 9 March 1998, by Mozambican police in Ressano Garcia, outside Maputo, for alleged gun-smuggling and espionage.
Ok at least we were 20 persons.. and could all pay it together.. some didn't have money.. but it worked out anyway somehow..
Each year, almost half of all pregnancies among American women are unintended. 1 About half of these unplanned pregnancies, 1.3 million each year, are ended by abortion. 1 , 2 Yet for a Christian woman, it may feel like she’s the only one dealing with this issue. Church leaders often don’t know how to approach the subject for fear of stirring “controversy.” Yet women need hope. They need to hear that others have faced the same pain and have found forgiveness and healing. That's why movies like October Baby are so important. The main character of October Baby is the young woman who survived the abortion attempt, and my heart also went out to her mother. No one knew the pain but her. I'm sure she was certain no one would understand.
Whilst news is constructed around a specific event and follows the criteria relating to the inverted pyramid of news writings who, what, where, when and why, the news feature is something more of a longitude, wider picture. It is the complete story on a recent topic and while it is written with similar urgency to a typical news story, it is based around the additional facts with provide the reader with more information. This post is looking at what to include and effective examples of news features to illustrate.
Is the Third Reich rising in Palmetto?
03 Stay As Sweet As You Are 4:35
In our married life we have moved 3 times, so the permanence of a physical place can not be home. This last place had 4 bedrooms for the 3 of us. I don't know if it was the 4 bedrooms or my approaching the big 4 oh, but we planned on having another baby. It was a very thought through decision, there is an 8 year gap in between them because of the complications in my first pregnancy. I am telling you then and there this little one completed the circle of what I call home. She completes our family and makes it a home and that is why I have used her picture for my LO.
He was rich, full-bodied, red-blooded, and I couldn't wait to ravish him. I raised my glass and gave a slow wink and an even slower smile to show my interest. A flirt by nature, I had forgotten how fun it was to flutter my eyelashes and use my feminine wiles.
Here is a list of things a dairy cow & I have in common.
Colossal desert centipedes with (of course) psionic powers. These creatures are immense (100-150') and capable of demolishing entire cities unless turned aside by overwhelming numbers or power. Fortunately they are not malicious, fighting only for food or when provoked.
Seven or seventy times seven, is not an absolute limit; Jesus followers must be always willing to forgive, as God freely forgives all who repent of their sin.
Ok first of all, thanks to all who commented and publicized the book giveaway for Carrie Harris' book Bad Taste in Boys! And the winner is - Kelly! Congratulations Kelly!
down on your knees.
Another series for Lithopinion, this time by the illustrator Austin Briggs, was done at the Mourlot workshop in Paris. His drawings were created with lithographic crayons and tusche washes, tools normally used on stone or metal places in printmaking.
WoW raiding in years past was far from perfect, but here we want to talk about what it did right. Even though the class balance, encounter design, and surrounding aspects of the game (e.g. consumables) were not up to today’s standards, the game allowed for deeply rewarding experiences because it remained true to the above ideal. Raiding in The Burning Crusade provided a perfectly good example. Freshly capped characters could run Karazhan, Gruul’s Lair, and Magtheridon’s Lair—easy, entry-level instances (putting aside the initial tuning difficulties those fights had, which are irrelevant here). Raiding the next tier, Serpentshrine Cavern and Tempest Keep, required completing some or all of the first tier (initially by attunements, and later simply due to gear requirements—again, details of the implementation are not critical). What matters is that SSC and TK were “open” long before the vast majority of players were done with the starting tier, and each each player (with her guild) was able to move into those zones at a time determined by one factor: when she was ready.
Not too shabby for the first week, eh?
By the year 2016 it is estimated that 43 percent of all US workers will work from home. That’s good news for the morning commute. But what about workplace productivity? Will we become even more isolated without all that watercooler chat?
1 ounce Hallertau (2.5% AA) 20 minutes
As I’m writing this review in the same week as ANZAC Day, I’d like to make the point that, by placing Fanny Durack, an Olympian, first in the book, the author or editor has, in my opinion, erred. The point of sport, in the early Australian national character, was to convert the young, muscular men from our colony into beef for the mincer of war. Australia didn’t lose the highest percentage of its adults to combat of any combatant country during the First World War by accident. It was design, and sport was central to that design.
These debates are a farce and a detriment to the electoral process. All they do is open Republicans to mocking by a liberal-biased media. To hell with the debates because they do not serve Republicans at all.
An initial assessment of the collection carried out by Alan Bekhuis (a now well known New Zealand photographic artist) prior to Donald’s appointment set in place the beginnings of the preservation programme that he furthered.
lung disease
On that note...
As I’ve said before… sadly, some of us will die with our music still in us.
Turns out Train Guy doesn’t live too far away from me (hence why I saw him on the train)… So we met up last night at a local bar for some drinks. Train Guy is extremely sexual. His eyes are captivating and are one of the things that compelled me to give him my number in the first place. We talked about life and about really random topics. Having been on so many “first dates” in the past few weeks, I am becoming a good judge at someones ability to come up with random conversation. Anyone can talk about what they do for work, where they live, what music they like. But the really interesting people will come up with totally random things to speak about. Train Guy is one of those guys. Two bottles of wine later and I was quite drunk. Maybe the wine was the reason I was enjoying the conversation so much.
At its heart, Mother is a character study of a matriarch (impressively played by Kim Hye-ja) who is so devoted to her son that, after he's convicted of a young girl's murder, she goes on the trail for the supposed real killer, so convinced she is that her son could not possibly have committed the crime. Her relationship with her son verges on the creepy (he sometimes sleeps with her on her bed, for instance), but her loyalty to him is undeniable...and, the film gradually reveals, dangerous verging on murderous.
Switch to black yarn
'So bust him,' says the Chief.
Welcome here on this december friday!
To end off the week, here is what didn't get blogged about.
I was selected to be one of the Official Bakers for the event.
Oh how I never tire of Summer’s work-arounds for the no profanities ordinance.
I wish I could say that I was bright eyed and bushy tailed today, however, that is not really the case. I am currently trying to caffinate myself out of my sleep deprivation haze. The little guy has been so healthy this year, but last night he spiked a fever of 103.2, and I was STILL up at 3am. Good times.
I kill myself sometimes.
to no avail. The seasons ran out of time.
A new stage in his life had begun.
(206) 221-6129
But you know what, she was just as loving and respectful as Ashley and Heather.
1. Introduction
An interesting week. The market opened the week with a large gap down, the fifth gap opening in six trading days, and traded down to SPX 1359 in the first half hour. That was the low for the week. The market then recovered, somewhat, on monday and tuesday. Then AAPL’s earnings were released after tuesday’s close. On wednesday the market rallied, despite a ‘hold the course’ FOMC statement. Thursday the rally continued. Then on friday Q1 GDP was reported lower than expected, but the market still managed to end higher. For the week the SPX/DOW were +1.65%, and the NDX/NAZ were +2.35%. Asian markets were -0.6%, European markets were +1.0%, and the DJ World index rose 1.1%. Economic reports were mixed, with negatives outpacing positives 7 to 6. On the uptick: new/pending homes sales, FHFA, new home prices, consumer sentiment and the monetary base. On the downtick: Q1 GDP, WLEI, Case-Shiller, durable goods orders, the M1-multiplier, and weekly jobless claims rose. Next week we’ll get reports on monthly Payrolls, ISM, Chicago PMI and Auto sales. Best to your week!
If Pia and the twins get kicked off tonight, I'm going to be hacked off beyond belief. Jacob is the first to get the news and Seacrest leads him on before telling him that he's safe. Without a lot of fake drama, Seacrest tells us that Pia is leaving.
Neither of these jobs, Hat World or Target are on my current resume. I have a college education and four more years of cleaning treadmills and screaming at ten year olds that serve a much better purpose. But my first job in zoning or ‘facing’ shelves and checking out rotten customers gave me the experience that just”answering phones” couldn’t have, it helped me appreciate a day off and made me promise that I would never, ever, work retail again.
Meaning: Wisdom
I Timothy 6:6
Fromagerie Fritz Kaiser: Tomme du Haut-Richelieu, a lovely washed-rind, goat-milk cheese from one of Quebec’s artisan-cheese pioneers.
Attainability: MARRIED
end that never will quite button.
“I think those people from the church. Or maybe those other people following us earlier. Somebody was coming, and I just felt I had to hide. What did you see in the house?”
Axelrod: welcome to the grown-up world Fluffy
Adoption is the perfect picture of God's amazing grace and love.
another like swirled chocolate
Set in the 1300s in England, this re-telling of Beauty and the Beast will capture your attention and your heart. Annabel is the main character, forced to be an indentured servant to Lord le Wyse or marry the foul Baliff Tom, a friend of her father's, who instills fear in her. She chooses to be a servant to the Lord, even though others have claimed he is accursed and a beast. Lord Ranulf le Wyse is the other main character, scarred from an accident when he was a teenager. His outward scars however, are not nearly as bad as the scarring of his heart. Will Annabel be the one to soften his heart of stone?
6. On Tuesday, I got a chance to mix things up with some new exercises that wore me out really fast but were lots of fun. I love adding variety to my workouts!
Lutan Fyah - Yu Looking Hot
Apparently, US academics and lawyers are getting very excited about this, particularly defence lawyers. Vanderbilt University (USA) recently opened a $27 million neuroimaging centre and ‘hopes to enrol students in a programme in the law and neuroscience’.
Rep. Eric Cantor (R-VA)
Tuesday- Candy jars with Hershey kisses with a cute note that said "Teachers can't survive on apples alone- Hugs for the teacher!"
At this point the last hour had finally arrived. Nancy took over the class, and kept us interested and enthused. My energy was definitely starting to wane by now, and we were doing 10-minute “standing hills”. Honestly the only way to get through this was to just close my eyes and visualize what I could. Visualize the hills, nice weather, maybe a road overlooking a river? Something scenic. I would visualize it in as much detail as possible, and before we knew it we would be done with that hill!
The third misperception is that romance novels are all about the sex. Porn for women. In my last book, As You Wish, the story is told in 306 pages. Of those, ten pages describe sex. That’s approximately three percent of the novel. And the rest is describing the characters’ clothing. Just kidding. There is an actual story. (I know. You’re shocked.) Depending on what type of book you pick up, the level of sensuality and the amount of sex will vary from having events occur behind closed doors to explicit erotic romances. And besides, what’s wrong with sex?
For over a century, the Convent at Mount St. Gabriel, a picturesque plot of land in the highlands of Peekskill, NY, was home to the Community of St. Mary. From its humble beginnings in 1872 in a clapboard farmhouse, the Convent soon grew into a multi-building complex with a full church, a school, and ample housing for both the Sisters and their charges. By 2003, when the convent moved to Greenwich, NY, the school had already been repurposed, but the Abbey proper, as well as the Chapel, remained vacant, as they have to this day.
And the brown of the paper
Should men help out around the house or should they absorb some responsibility. Zig Ziglar thinks “…there is a significant difference in taking responsibility and offering to help”.
It was a very cloudy today, good and bad. Good because there was no hot sun and a good day for cycling. Bad because the photos did not all look good.
Another reason to love fall? The produce choices available in this season just can’t be beat. So in honor of this fabulous time of year, where there are Apples! Pumpkins! Squash! All sorts of root vegetables! I thought it might be nice to focus on fall produce recipes for the next few weeks.
Makes 8 large muffins or 16 small muffins.
an unfolded road map to whatever father
Iowa City police notified area law enforcement agencies and the University of Iowa issued a Hawk-Alert. The Iowa City school district ordered a school lockdown for a brief period of time but lifted that at 9:45 a.m.
40. This concludes my 40 wanna be meaty chunks of direction and virtual plethora platter of wisdom nuggets post.
2085.E-IV/14/1999. “House of Lords May Not Survive the Democratic Bias of Our Day.” Hickory Daily Record, Hickory, North Carolina, p. A-4 (abridged).
Fishy glares at me, "You have to be joking?"
Puck Connolly is different. She never meant to ride in the Scorpio Races. But fate hasn’t given her much of a chance. So she enters the competition — the first girl ever to do so. She is in no way prepared
Today was one of the last days one could go out and see the roses.
The 12 pieces from Interior Angles represents a different direction for me. They are all created on 12" x 12" wood cradled panels and are abstract acrylics. No mixed media to be found, although by clicking on and enlarging these images, you might be able to get an idea of the layers and texture that make up these pieces.
1/2 cup cappuccino chips (I used Guittard)
What time is left is all that counts, and this remaining time is my RESPONSIBILITY.
About 45 minutes later you will see them slightly wilted.
They drive Mercedes-Benz and even Rolls Royce’s. They wear expensive jewelry and tailor-made designer clothes. Yet some who follow these false prophets have accused Christians of exposing them because they are jealous of them.
Whenever I see a car with a ‘Baby on Board’ sign hanging in the back window I wonder what reaction the driver expects from other roads users. Does the driver feel a sense of protection from displaying this small yellow diamond and declaring to all the dangerous and irresponsible drivers out on the road that this vehicle is now safe and immune to anything which may run into it?
Cross that desert to her!
Rajesh asked, If an existing tenured employee has completed 2 yrs. with an org’n and its been only an year since you have joined, being at the same level though your performance has been superior, can you demand for a promotion..
I use it almost daily for the dishes now (hot water takes a while to get to the tap and so as to not waste too much, I boil it). For making coffee or tea or hot chocolate. It already gets a lot of use. But I've found one more way to make it useful for us.
Making a return to the countdown is the black and white cutout, this time of Lalo Schifrin smoking a pipe - that was the best promo shot that could be offered? - against a lurid purple backdrop. That sort of low-tech associating got us through that troubled decade together.
It's not about what beer is, but what beer does. That's a quote from Erik "Big" Boles, my business partner and the Founder/CEO of Beer Tap TV. It's one of the many quotables he and I have come up with to nutshell our philosophy on the juggernaut that is craft beer.
On Elaphonisi I forgot that I was a ginger and the sun is not my friend and burnt my ass pretty badly. Yes my whole back and the backs of my legs, but especially my ass. That is the worst. Serves me right, sitting on the evil little wood and straw chairs that every cafe seems to keep.
RIN is six 50-minute episodes and I figured I’d keep watching as long as it kept me hooked.
Science Fiction, by its nature, tends to travel some dark roads. None darker, I fear, than a single, disturbing question: Why Do We Matter?
Flour- 1 cup
He added his own feet which I'm thinking was only to show the world how bad I need a tan. Sigh.
Mortgage rates are at their lowest and make buying affordable to many. Beware analysts expect rates to rise any day now, so if you are wondering if you should buy or wait, Now is the time.
If I leave the house knowing what MUST get done, and what errands are optional, I don't get stressed when I don't get to do all the things I had planned.
Nonetheless the idea wasn't completely abandoned. Thus it was we booked one of London's top Indian restaurants, Cafe Spice Namaste. It is rather convenient for our flat and falls into E's definition (albeit at the bottom end of her expectations.) We have been before, but were vaguely disappointed and it was some time ago, so we duly reported, had highs and not so highs and left full up, but feeling perhaps it lacks the precision of cooking, particularly in spicing and sauces, that is so important in Indian food and that you will get in say, Mother India's Cafe in Glasgow. But this isn't about the grub.
What better way to celebrate the first day of Spring then to attend the Sobo Style Spring Arts Market.
7 1/2 to 8 cups flour
But alas. It IS better for my family. And it will save us a ton of money. And while I’m not one to clip coupons or only shop at the grocery stores that have the bargains this week, I DO think I need to be a better steward of what God’s given me in this area. Plus, it will be healthier for us. The food industry is pretty gross these days and I constantly feel convicted about not taking the time to prepare my week in such a way, so that I don’t need to eat out. But I’m exhausted and don’t take time to do it. Well, tomorrow starts a new day for me.
Johannesburg - Three KwaZulu-Natal police officers were arrested on Wednesday for allegedly assaulting a man with broom and mop handles, the Independent Complaints Directorate (ICD) said.
- the end of the pencil is marked with the shade of the eyeliner, and it even matches the finish of a given shade (cream vs. shimmer)
Chinese cooking wine (shao shing chiew, optional), 1 teaspoon
We will give you a punch card and if you get it punched at each location we will give you a limited run Indy Crawl Pint glass!!! Must be 21 years old to participate.
part of the yard is fenced off for keeping chickens. there’s even a coop. it’s entrapment! i can’t have an empty coop in my yard! i harbor some reservations about keeping chickens, but i think i’m gonna go for it. there are so many signs that it’s meant to be. first the coop, then there was a free backyard chicken class yesterday, and directly from there i went to an antique store where i found a cool old chicken feeder…i still have a lot of research to do, but knowing me, i’ll probably pick up some chicks later this month.
I added a squirt of lemon, another of ketchup and another of hot sauce, put it in a pretty bowl, with a bigger one full of tortilla chips beside it, called it a dip, and it was great.
Be deadening me to real cares;
I went to Boulder Running Company and they put me in a pair of Brooks Adrenalines. I liked them ok, but them seemed a little clunky. I'm a mid-foot stiker and with these shoes I have a bit of wear on my left shoe on the where the heel meets the mid-foot. I was thinking maybe this was due to the 14mm and I've been wanting to switch something with 4mm.
I have to say, that it was a great learning experience for me. I do love all of them, but I also love each one of them. They are very different little girls. It took some thought to put into words everything that I love about each of them.
And this is it! Featured here initially will be a reproduction of “Mainly Concerning a Hobbit”, but there’s already another piece in the works, and more stories knocking around in my head besides.
Elegant Edges Cricut cartridge - Stamp cut
Julian Tertini was working as a public servant in the mid-1970s when he quit his job and started a furniture company with no prior business experience. That company was Whitewood Warehouse. By 2012, the Savoy has stood as the cartoon bear-sporting Whitewood Warehouse longer than it did as a cinema.
Do we glorify God by dwelling on our sinful past? I think Paul got the message for the only answer Christ gave him in Acts 22:21 was to repeat Himself.
Lately, I’ve been having very vivid dreams about my death. Last night, I dream that I died. First I was just walking around my neighborhood. Then I started to feel pain so I walked home. As I was walking home, for some reason I took a detour into an abandoned house. Then I was just in the abandoned house, walking around. Then an older woman (who looked suspiciously like my kindergarten teacher) and a little girl who looked like a porcelain doll ( I could only see them from behind) told me to get out because I was gonna die. Before I could even say anything I was in my house laying on the couch in my living room. Except this wasn’t exactly my house.
-Harry Truman
Alongside stories of the ‘Beastly Bosh’ turning people into soap, the lie-mongers spread stories of German soldiers raping and murdering women of all ages (from very young children to very old pensioners). In the Second World War these atrocities became a reality, although it was Russian and African-American soldiers, violating and murdering Germans with wholehearted Zionist encouragement, these real crimes were ignored. On the rare occasions when these atrocities were admitted, they were treated as justice for the suffering inflicted on the Jews!
Spray a 10-by 15-inch rimmed baking sheet generously with nonstick spray.
Do some tricks for the nice ladies
With this, many hands shot up and I got all kinds of good answers! (Yay! I was getting participation!)
Thank you, Herr Tkach! I smelled faintly of that orange tinted fixer for years afterward, but I found a bit of myself, with your help, making photographs in your darkroom.
“At the theatre, they began pushing and tugging at us and threatened to call the police,” Danielsen says.
The bread didn't work out too well. But the muffins rocked. They were moist for days. Seriously.
I can't wait for the next series, just can't get enough of the Cumberbatch!
In any case, the idea that the Sunday Times investigation, denounced by Fifa's "ethics committee" for sensationalism and twisting the facts has been forgotten because it happened more than 3 days before the bid is made is nonsense. Also worth remembering is the Mail on Sunday's truly unnecessary publication of an indiscreet conversation the then FA chairman had, which involved unprovable claims that the Russians had been bribing referees for the Spanish, who in return would vote for their bid for the 2018 cup. The Mail, strangely, came in for very little actual criticism from its rivals who instead focused on "rescuing" the bid. Dog doesn't always not eat dog in what used to be known as Fleet Street, but what is clear is that the right-wing press always bites the BBC, regardless of how it would never allow such concerns expressed in the Sun's editorial, even patriotic ones, to influence when and what they decide to publish.
Some lamentable flight from thee.
Jimmy is way too old to be afraid of the dark, at least according to his older sister. In fact, he seems to be afraid of everything, probably because he's constantly harassed and mistreated by those around him. But when his wish for a protector comes true, he gets more than he bargained for.
So, Boris has beaten Ken by that painfully narrow margin of 3% but Labour's Len Duvall is re-elected with almost 50% of the vote as Assembly Member for Greenwich and Lewisham. You've read it all elsewhere by now, but here goes for posterity:
Perhaps showing your capability is the weakness of this world. “The House That Drips Blood on Alex” shows itself to be that blasted form of intentional-unintentional-hilarity, which ruins all of its so-bad-it’s-good value. But if Magician Wiseau is unintentionally revealing his genius, there might be some redemptive value in “Alex.”
She looked up, face streaked with dirt, and flashed a radiant smile, "I'm growing up," she pointed at her friend and continued, "Afon is making sure I am pretty." Paint was sloshed all over the place.
Help me, Lord, to never take this lavish gift for granted, but to bow my heart, my mind and my knee to You in forever gratitude every single day of this life.
I stayed overnight in my brother’s dorm room Friday night and we woke up early Saturday to pack up his stuff and help him move out of his dorm. We grabbed a quick breakfast at Westside Market (no, not the Cleveland landmark) before meeting up with my parents to pack up his stuff into their rented van. My brother had to work again, so my parents, B and I headed to the High Line to explore the green area on what was turning out to be a gorgeous, 70something degree day. The High Line was beautiful – for you non-NYers, the High Line is a park/walking route in on an old, abandoned above-ground and above the streets train tracks. The tracks are no longer in use, and instead of tearing them down, the city decided to turn the overgrown tracks into a park-like walking area, above the city. There are gorgeous plants, vendors selling food and cute artsy stuff, sprinklers for kids to run through, and more, all along the walkway.
So last week was a whirlwind!! I was in Mexico City, Mexico for work Monday through Thursday. Then Friday afternoon, after only about 15 hours home, I picked up my friend Lorraine and headed north to Interlaken Inn in Lakeville, Ct for our bi-annual Country Quilter quilting retreat. Along with 55 other quilters we had a wonderful 3 days of eating, laughing and quilting, thanks to the ladies of the former Country Quilter in Somers, NY. Even though the shop is closed, Claire Oehler, Nancy Mirman and Noreen Lipolis (CNN to their friends) have kept the retreat going. Claire was the owner of the Country Quilter for over 20 years, so she knows what it takes to make quilters feel at home.
a) 67%
Unfortunately, your body and your fat do not have a linear, two-step relationship. Instead, think of your body as an orchestra. All of its systems, organs, muscles, cells, fluids, hormones, and chemicals play different instruments, make different sounds (your intestines have dibs on first-chair tuba), and produce different results depending on how you use them. They work independently, but only when they’re played together can you appreciate the magnificent symphony of your own biology. As the conductor of your biological orchestra, you control how the instruments interact and what the final result will be.
As beautiful as those bookstores are, according to the UK's Guardian newspaper, they come in second and third on a list of the world's most beautiful bookstores. And number one? It's this incredible place in Maastricht, Netherlands.
In one of the chapters, Sarai discusses how we plan both what we wear and what we decide to make for ourselves. She suggests an exercise of picking out five things that you love to wear and why - which in turn, may give you clues on how to build a wardrobe around the qualities that are important to you. I found both Tasia's and Karen's choices really interesting, but I was also very intrigued to read comments from their readers. It's amazing how much of your personality and essence readers can glean from your blog: how you dress and how you write and what it says about you. So, completely jumping on the bandwagon, here are my five choices.
This is not to say that neuroscience has no uses in explaining music and the value we attach to it. On the contrary, the link between the way we experience musical structure and the way our ears were originally conditioned to monitor our environment for danger and desire should certainly have an important role to play in our understanding of how and why the musical practices we now encounter (in the form of sound waves, radio waves and hexadecimal numerical systems) originally evolved.
15. 18 Ferncliff Rd… Asked $1,995,000. Sold $1,550,000. Started: 6/2008
Brownell, C. A., Svetlova, M., & Nichols, S. (2009). To Share or Not to Share: When Do Toddlers Respond to Another’s Needs?. Infancy, 14(1), 117-130. doi:10.1080/15250000802569868
Accessory617 (sold out) (click for pic). Haha, I couldn't resits buying two of these. I knew that one day, I'll force a friend to wear one.
I read something the other day that compared a spanking to sex. More specifically it was on how tears to spanking was much the same as orgasm to sex. It was well written but I will just sum it up by saying they are seemingly closely related because in both cases your partner lovingly brings you to a certain release.
This past Saturday I attended an excellent workshop by Dennis J. Smith on social media. There are new ways to self promote on the Internet every day, it seems. And since I've jumped into the eBook world with my entire cyber body and soul, with quite a bit of success, I've been following other writers' journeys and thinking about the whole "How to sell? What should I be doing to become a best seller? Do I HAVE to do every social network? Do I need to go to every conference? Do I--" You know the drill.Then there's the whole "this person did nothing and sold millions" and "this person did everything and sold tons" and then "I'm driving myself crazy trying to do everything and selling nothing."
Don't forget....there's a 40% sale on everything at the store until the end of the month in honor of Mr. Sweet 'n Sassy's birthday! Now's a good time to add this set, or others on your wish list, to your collection!
The banks know their power, too. American Bob Diamond, who took over Barclays in 2011, let it be known that he’d consider moving the bank’s highly profitable investment banking arm from Britain to New York if it became, as he saw it, over-regulated or over-taxed. And he’s by no means the only banker making veiled threats behind the scenes.
My balcony overlooks the satellite. Steam rises from the black ground below. The fluorescent sun hums down from the top of the dome, illuminating the colony as though it’s on display – as though the satellite is a glass box, made just for the universe to peer into and smile. White light shines down on the twisting streets and the tilting complexes and the human beings. The faint wails of sirens bounce across the stretch of uneven towers. Far below, the tops of heads push across the road like blood cells pulsing through a vein. They bump and shove in a steady stream. The edge of the great barrier wall looms like a mountain in the distance.
One of the best ways to find an agent who might be a fit is to attend writers’ conferences like this one, where they often speak. You can quickly get a feel for their personality and can probably slip them your card.
Jack Box has been one of my most devoted readers for almost as long as drinkdrank has been kicking. He regularly comments on posts and I can honestly say: Jack loves beer. Jack loves beer so much, he took my idea to compare canned versus bottled beer, and ran with it. In fact, I'd say he ran with it like Forrest freakin' Gump. Jack took the initiative and selected a number of canned and bottled beers; employed his own "interactive sippy tests"; and then reported back the results! I think we've found drinkdrank's first contributing editor. Although I use the term "editor" loosely, because—as I'm sure you've come to realize—there is very little editing being done here.
20. During these last steps of your ascension pathway, countless light beings throughout this universe are with you in spirit and many are walking alongside you.
Hey u,
Christ has given us the victory! Let that overshadow the criticism.
But if ever there was a time when I did not feel like smiling, it is now. I don’t even want to leave my bed.
Release date: October 11, 2011
Beam Game
It's just one of those days, I guess. Sparkled and sleepy, where somewhere between Zen seeing and skink tails, you dance on the head of a pin. Alone.
Thank you Bill, Victoria & Gwendolyn, for opening doors we could never have opened ourselves. To our parents and Recipients, our readership and our friends, thank you for your understanding and all of your patience. And thank you, as always, to those both inside and outside of this community, for your support and participation in this effort.
Nevertheless, fans can expect the group to debut this summer in the midst of an increasingly competitive K-pop world!
I live on the Kansas side so we usually get stuff way after Missouri. The announcement of the Sam Adams Deconstructed sample pack has left me in wait. Like a lion on the Serengeti I have been hunting this sampler pack for weeks now. Crouched in the grass and visiting the liquor store every other day, my hunt was finally rewarded. The thrill of the kill (well, the purchase) will be enjoyed this weekend. The sampler will include two of the regular Sam Adams Latitude 48 IPA's. With this they are including 5 single hopped versions of the Latitude. All 5 hops are used in the original Latitude 48 but you will now be able to taste each hop as it would appear in the beer individually. The hops are Hallertau Mittelfrueh from Germany, East Kent Goldings from England, Ahtanum, Simcoe, and Zues. The last three come from Washington's Yakima Valley. I think this is a great idea and will help further the education of beer geeks and casual consumers alike. Even if you don't care for the Latitude 48, I think this would be a good way to experience what unique flavor each hop contributes to the final beer. I've contemplated trying something like this as a homebrewer and the amount of time involved in making 5 separate small batches would be hard to commit to. So for around $14.00 this is a super cheap and quick way to increase your hop knowledge.
IT'S ALL IN THE MIND!
Saturday was spent venturing to downtown Milwaukee. We stopped for lunch at Alterra, this really cool coffee shop that I'm basically obsessed with now. It took me forever to decide what I wanted to eat because EVERYTHING sounded delicious. I ended up getting the Roasted Red Pepper and Brie Melt and Iced Tea. Next we met up with our friends to go on a cute (or as cute as we silly geese were able to make it) double date to the Art Museum and Water Street Brewery for dinner. I didn't take a picture of what I got at the restaurant, but it was a delicious warm, vegetarian pasta salad served a top lots of fresh spinach. Just the way I would have made it!
Wed - Principles of Computing - 10.00-12.50 - Chilliwack; Intro to Programming - 2.30-6.10 - Chilliwack
The mower whirred on.
Fact; My name is Elizabeth Cheyenne. :L
I think that our biggest issue is Jacob's attachment to us. Again, I must say that things are going very well, but it's as though we just realized that we've only been home for 3 months and that we thought we were more established than we really are. Realistically, Jacob has only had 3 months to attach and that just isn't enough time to see the healthy results we were perhaps hoping for. Jacob went to a birthday party the other day. I stayed with him at the party, because we are definitely not at a point where we can just leave him. Not that he needs us, but that he doesn't yet realize that Brad and I are FOREVER his parents. So, we took our coats off and I sent him in with the other kids. Although I was in the room with him 95% of the time, he felt absolutely no need to seek me out for anything. When he needed his drink he went to the closest person, when he needed a snuggle, he went to the closest person, when he needed to go to the bathroom he told the closest person (who then let me know and I took him). His independence is far too established for a two year old. And at that, it isn't independence, as he needs someone to help him with all of the normal two year old needs. When I did take his hand and try to help him he whined or cried... I tried really hard not to allow the feelings of rejection to stick around very long, but I long for the day when Jacob seeks me out and needs ME! I spend all day every day with him, and when we're at home, of course he looks to me, but as soon as we are with other people, it doesn't matter to him who helps him, holds him or comforts him.
Hey, Bobby shared the secrets of my soul.
Still to come tonight, The Big Show will face Alberto Del Rio.
It was while I was prison that I first became acquainted with the ACES Study. ACES is an acronym for adverse childhood experiences study. Adverse childhood experiences are, simply, put traumatic experience which occurred before the age of 18. What I learned was among my fellow female inmates, nearly 100% of these women had an ACES score of over 6, with 10 being the highest possible score. Statistics on women in prison who have suffered childhood abuse and trauma are generally quoted at being of 60% to 90%. I tend to believe the 90%. Since women in prison are almost always there for drug and alcohol related crimes, what does this tell us? It tell me that these women, myself included, we not born flawed, nor defective, nor are we merely addictive personalities. We are women who have been hurt, and hurt again, and then hurt some more, and we coped with that pain the best way we knew how, as faulty and personally destructive as was that coping mechanism. Of course, when we are drinking or drugging, we are a perfect candidate for an abuser looking for an easy target to prey on, and the cycle continues, and gets worse.
We just tried it once before, it hurt, but just looking at your flushed face now and how you are shifting on your chair .. was enough for me to realize that you loved feeling my cock in this little tiny hole of yours.
Helena
“I’m sorry,” Jessica said, reaching across the table to lay her hand on his. “If there’s anything I can do to help, just let me know.”
Luigi Calvi, 34, East Rutherford, N.J.
When we mixed For Bright and Healthy Mornings with Yeol Park from Pigibit5, The Boy Least Likely To and Go! Team were mentioned for reference. However, it turned out that reference is nothing but reference.
The lilac blooms were colored with a base of V12. I chose this color because it's called "Pale Lilac" and I wanted to see how accurate it really was. Sure enough, I like it for a pale base color to my blooms.
The Eagle had two long-time editors, Thomas Kinsella (1861 to 1884) followed by St. Claire McKelway (1886- 1915), who had the greatest influence upon the paper’s style and voice, and oversaw the paper through the height of its influence.
CLICK HERE to find a recipe for puppy chow. Thank you, Tammy, Jesse, Noah, Hannah, Jack and Amelia, for brightening my first day of May with your unexpected gift.
You don't need a recipe for turkey(the directions are printed on the wrapper)!
Published by St. Martin’s Press
11 Prayer Of Death Part One
Why did I stay silent until now?
That a time could ever be,
One week ago today, Matt moved out of our house and into the apartment that he will be sharing with Kylee after they're married. (Six weeks!) My baby has taken one more step towards being completely on his own. It could have been a traumatic day, but it wasn't. Mostly because I've seen him almost every day since then. And because he still hasn't moved all of his belongings out of our house.
can we talk about phobias for a second? we all have them, some more odd than others. i think i've mentioned this here before, but my phobia is...
The Mormons can pack up and go home
I can't say enough about making lists. They are invaluable to get things done and when things get busy and guests are arriving. They keep you organized and truly aid in you having a good time also. When people ask if they can help, you can glance it over and give them a job. I love it when someone preps for me (especially someone who knows how to chop etc.) and I can focus on cooking. As a guest, I absolutely love being someone's prep cook. A delicious bottle of wine in the kitchen with the cooks is a must!
If the trends continue then being a self sustaining place will be extremely important in order to not only accommodate the locals but bring about visitors.
What a dish.
UPDATE : 240am CDT 4/23/2012:
Perhaps even more fascinating than what Fassbinder puts up on the screen are the influences one can sense in sci-fi films that both preceded and followed World on a Wire: Alphaville (1965), 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), Blade Runner (1982), Total Recall (1990), The Matrix (1999). But could Wong Kar-Wai, of all directors, have picked up something from Fassbinder too? The proliferation of mirror-reflection shots in World on a Wire, to my mind, greatly recall similar ones in Wong's In the Mood for Love (2001) and 2046 (2005). Fassbinder's sensibility, of course, is far cooler than Wong's superheated romanticism—but maybe they're not so far apart after all: At the conclusion of this majestic sci-fi epic, love wins out in the end, in its own way.
The hills miles clocked in at 8:02. I remember during the last 0.1 of the mile desperately trying to get my split below 8 and obviously failing. But still, I’m actually pleased with that hilly mile. I also tried to take water on the run doing that “fold to make a spout” thing with my cup and getting water up my nose. Epic fail.
- on a t-shirt at the bus stop the day after I made this realization
“Yes?” Bert questioned. He crossed his legs contently, appearing to have no intention of rising from his seated position on his friend’s trembling frame. “Well, best be out with it, before the tea wears off and I become grumpy. That will happen in about …”—he checked his watch—“half an hour, give or take a minute. As you know, I tend to take thing better after I’ve had a spot of tea.”
If you are terrified of mashed potatoes because of the carbs (GASP!) and the butter (DOUBLE GASP!) then have no fear my friends...I have found a pretty darn good alternative.
Kevin Spacey is wonderful playing the serial killer. He is extremely creepy and very believable.
Yola
I dare not think of my own struggles
So you dare to say it all out loud
I would say that the deal was all about the real estate benefit for the private developer, not about tending to, sustaining, or managing the community asset of the hospital.
In 1971, Wilson dropped his C.I.A. connection and was a part of Task Force 157, a secret Navy intelligence unit that employed 50 to 75 agents to monitor and collect information on Soviet shipping. It reported not only on routine cargo items but also watched for the covert shipment of military goods and nuclear weapons. The unit also was charged with the responsibility of picking up intelligence operatives from Taiwan and secretly ferrying them inside mainland China, where they would implant sensitive seismic monitors and radio equipment. Those operations were stopped after President Richard M. Nixon’s visit to Peking in 1972, and C.I.A. officials were astonished to learn later that some of the sensitive equipment, designed solely for use inside China, was appearing for sale in the international arms market.
The majority of the featured collections are available now on their website and I know that I will spend lots of late nights perusing online. I always do the most damage buying things when it's late. It's such a bad habit!
We started our day at the Riflemans & Costume Parade which is a 2 hour fashion show of the Bavarian people's dress, bands, weaponry and of course beer. It was really cool to see all the different regions represented, the decorated lederhosen & dirndl and the huge horses pulling carts loaded with beer barrels.
“…a place to collaborate, cooperate & contribute to our collectively created experience… an opportunity to invent the world anew… to generate a culture… a connective environment… to be idealistic & celebratory… to have fun… this town may be temporary, but we hope the experience stays with you… this is an invent rather than an event…”
here is a picture of a dove with some baby bunnies.
♥ 1 cup packed brown sugar
continue with replacing the waist band—and then finally, the hem, since this skirt too, was too long and dowdy looking. Likely I'll get the ironing done, (and some other ironing that accumulated) but I don't think I'll finish the skirt today.
Orange Basil Cookies
I believe the idea is to post 5 little-known facts about yourself, and then tag
DIY Onion Soup Mix
This was a slow run, even for me. The humidity this morning was at 93% and with a 72 degree temperature, it was like running through a brick wall. It’s been a long time since I sweated this much. I was sweating the minute I walked out of the door this morning.
Keeping distracted is what's on the agenda!
“Only YOU could dream about running a Sardine shop” She said.
I didn't pick up on this so had to bake them in the same tray
And i begAn with delightfull fried shrimpies.........
BBC Video- Walking With Cavemen.
I hate to start off on a bad note because there are highly admirable qualities to credit in this film, but this is an exploration of me understanding what I haven’t like about this film for so long. Only now, by way of actually analyzing the film, can I pinpoint those reasons. However, that doesn’t mean I have all bad things to say of it, but let me get the nagging issues out of the way first.
Some of the jobs that listed a need for cloud computing skills: computer programmers, IT specialists, computer software engineers, computer system engineers, and web developers.
With quiet resignation, I once again closed my eyes and listened to the gentle sounds of nature and asked that the powers that be please grant me my wish of a fulfilling life that was pain free.
Information Management Technician
3. You see a gorgeous girl at a party. You go up to her and get her telephone number. The next day, you call and say: 'Hi, I'm very rich.'Marry me.' - That's Telemarketing
But first, lets get started with June's challenge.
David: My favorite parts of the 'music seen' around here are: the people I get to play music with; the seco pearl; KUNM free-form & my recording studio up in Questa: the BARN.
The program has caused quite a stir in the publishing industry, for good reason (as you'll see).
And it is definitely a disadvantage.
Any questions?
We’ll let you shake & bake thru the office,
The art of the nail design has made a huge comeback in the last two-three years and I couldn't be more excited about this latest one. If you are not familiar with my "Nails Did" feature, I love nail bling!
Thanks friends!
zest of 2 oranges
Four actors create nine characters whose lives intersect in seemingly random incidents throughout “Speaking in Tongues.” This intriguing trilogy of interwoven stories unveils a lonely marriage, a missing person, indiscretion and betrayal. On an isolated road, a leading psychiatrist disappears. As a detective works to piece together what happened, he delivers a puzzle of relationships in crisis. People are not who they seem to be. This highly charged thriller is a painfully honest and wickedly funny drama about making mistakes and living with the consequences.
Call them what you will Tramps, Bums, Hobo’s, The Homeless, they intrigue me. If I see one of them exhibiting particularly strange behaviour I am fascinated and usually can’t put them out of my mind for at least a day or two until something else catches my eye and my attention. They always leave me with more questions than answers…
I have cast on for Tinder in the meanwhile. I just couldn't face a 4ply knit at the moment so this fits the bill. I am crazy about the bright pink. It is more fuschia and less neon in real life, but it certainly is bright nevertheless. The yarn is Tivoli Celtic Aran 100% wool. It is a bit rough on the hands but should soften on washing.
Many of you may recall that I am addicted to fresh herbs--their scent, their flavor, their texture, their beauty--as well as to their planting. I grub about in dirt the way a toddler plays in a sandbox, and with equal joy. It is primal, this urge; it truly does reconnect me to my planet. Reassuring to know that despite our many efforts at destruction--deliberate or not--she continues, spinning rapidly on her axis, revolving slowly around her Sun, submitting coyly to the antics of her changeling Moon. And that it is possible to hold her within the palm of my hand.
to school every morning.
In other ways, this blog is about all children and their rights. It's about every child's right to be treated as a full human being. It's not condemning mothers who use things like corporal punishment. Instead it's pointing out the logical problems with it and the justifications for it, and explaining what I do differently.
Their once was a girl who was oblivious to young teen love. She didn’t pay much mind to boyfriends and enjoyed having the company of just friends. But one day a guy approached her and tried to grasp and maintain the attention of her pretty eyes. He introduced himself as Gerson and she as Emily. Starting off with a truthful relationship, 3 months later Gerson leaves Emily to go to Florida for a few months. He selfishly promised to return to be with her, however many months went by. So, Emily who opened up her heart was left with the question – “why me?”
Ten days and nights, with sleepless eye,
Through Space, he expressed some embarrassment about the now obvious inaccuracy of his imagination: specifically he pointed out that the "starship" (the sphere) couldn't contain enough fuel to have such a huge
2012 Chevy Camaro
Way too much drama for me to handle.
With our children, we don't focus on their behaviour, but on the needs underneath the behaviour. It is really helpful to do this with our husbands as well.
“Andy, I’ll call Andy! Thank god Andy was home is all I can say as I write this within minutes he arrives and about a half hour later of banging and levering he has the entire system shut down. Now to assess the damage.
Happy Weekend To You All
-I didn't do my hair or get ready for chorus because I didn't go to chorus.
Variously formated (html/pdf/doc) briefings include:
Why wait? Let the preparation begin in my heart. May each of the 40 days ahead be a celebration of the gifts God gives to us every day....Joy. Peace. Hope. Love. Life. Abundant Life...to name a few.
Then last night happened. My throat was itchy. It hurt to swallow. I was sneezing four times in a row.
While your server will open your wine and keep it on ice, but don’t expect traditional wine service like you get when you order off the house wine list. If your wine is left on the table, feel free to pour your own.
I can give you a million excuses right off the top of my head.
They call for 1 1/2 cups of sugar (half brown - half white). A couple of months I decided to slowly cut back on the sugar every time I made them to see if less sugar would effect the taste. I'm down to one cup and I haven't noticed a difference.
4 body
One of the things about kids, and I have talked about this before, is how you can look at them, and see how God looks at us (even if it's only a limited view by comparison). While at the beach I was out in the water with Josh, the waves were big and Josh was hanging on to be for dear life (albeit with a huge smile on his face). Grant and his son Hayden were also swimming together in much the same manner as Josh and I. I heard Grant say something that I had been saying to Josh numerous times, 'I've got you, I won't let you go, trust me'. Still, both boys clung to our necks, neither trusting fully that they were safe. It struck me that we are like this, or at least I am like this. I have the maker of the universe holding me up above the water, and I am clinging to his neck and he is whispering to me 'I've got you, I won't let you go, trust me'. Instead of letting go I am so scared of getting in over my head that I cling tighter.
to see Vesuvius redden the sky, say
Ministers have promised that frontline warranted police officer roles will not be undertaken by private companies for profit. The picture above shows that this is clearly untrue. You could be convicted and sent to prison on the strength of the evidence gathered by a for-profit corporate investigator.
The rest of the week, I am going to highlight what I did to pull together my little dude's party. I am so excited to share and hope to see you back here tomorrow for Pinata Making 101 - Mario Style.
The fact that the soundtrack carries one of my favourite Chopin pieces (Nocturne E-flat Opus 9 #2) was another delightful surprise. My collection of the soundtrack pieces in Youtube: http://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PL7BAC4DA44B3C09D5
The summer is a time for a lot of change. The majority of the residence here are students at Creighton. Mostly Dental, and Law, some Medical and a few Physical Therapy. It makes it very sad and also exciting when the summer comes. Many students are graduating and moving out and many are moving in to begin their education.
Someday, when this night is over
How can I get involved with Babyloss? - The babyloss website is run by volunteers, who give up their time to support other bereaved parents, organise fundraising and remembrance events, and update the website.
The first was Design Den in the Curve gallery in the Barbican foyer - modern, design-led, with an interesting range of products ranging from the supercool to the quirky - and the source of one or two interesting and unusual presents for me to tuck into the family Christmas stockings.
I’ve had shows where this has worked, because I’ve kept the tension up in the room, and used the occasion. Equally, I played a show not that long ago, where an attempt was made and I still couldn’t remember the words (I must be getting old, hehe) and I failed to accept the moment I was in, by reacting to it appropriately.
Brimming with respect and gratitude Tara turned to get another coffee and saw Ron watching her.
For the Biscuits:
one hour interview about music, drugs, politics and social changes circa 1967
No, I did not know that and dern it, I still don’t even after I’ve been told. I’m thick headed about my aversion to Linkedin.
Handpicked
Finish: sheer/jelly
Take the ribs out of the soup pot and place them on a cooky sheet. I put some store bought BBQ sauce on my family’s ribs, but I left mine without any. You could probably make your own sauce, even a paleo version, but I didn’t have the time or the inclination. Put them in the oven for 5-10 minutes, until the BBQ sauce is bubbling and starting to blacken. (Don’t burn it! You want it to just start crackling before you take them out.)
04. While You Are Thinking (Adamkewitz/Braun) - 2:06
– You couldn’t do it now?
The NUMBER ONE thing you have to know and remind yourself when making your stays is that the empire waistline is KEY. You mess with that, you will have problems. Your garments are designed to fit around this elevated waistline which runs directly under the base of your bust, and if you are not getting the proper lift, or your gussets are too low, your gown’s cut and placing will suffer.
I was reminded of Chagall as I watched, yet again, Notting Hill this afternoon. Art is so often fascinating, in the way that books and poetry can be. How one person perceives it may be completely different to another persons way. But let me give three of the possibilities in understanding which come to my mind when I look upon Chagall’s work.
Records — Tappan Zee 9-0.
Rel took the first track down off the canal path. It had been stepped once, but the paving was starting to disintegrate and the mud made it slick and treacherous. He got both his backpack straps over his shoulders - they pinched at his neck, too tight since his shoulders had started to broaden - and descended with his arms half-extended for balance, leaning slightly backwards.
You’re less than 1, in envy and dissent.
I have to give props to this place - it really is great for wheelchairs - ramps and parking, and then a platform that rolls right on to the train. It's bench seats rather than dining car type seats, but we didn't care - we were happy to be able to ride at all! If you want the least amount of people, I recommend the earliest train of the day. But even so, it was fine, there was room for all of us, and we all had fun. The train was loud and rambunctious, full of kids - perfect for us! For those who have wheelchairs in Colorado, I definitely recommend it.
The Dutch controlled the floods. All of Europe controls famine--it’s non-existent now. Apart from a couple of examples of massive, state-sponsored slaughter (Nazi Germany, Communist Russia), Europe since 1700 doesn’t even begin to compare to Africa today. Casual slaughter is another thing altogether--rare in Europe, common in Africa.
I have a hard time discerning the varying degrees of light and how well the area is lit where I am shooting. This I know from experience and so now I take some test pictures before getting into the heat of the photo shoot. This tells me some amazing things about my Eye sight. The Iris opening so wide that I do not notice the slight shadows between light fixtures and my Brain filling-in details of the wall paneling. We have an awesome device in our Brain to automatically fill-in such detail! Thank God for giving us such magnificence to be used and shared!
You need to complete both the Easter themed challenge and the Blog Hop to be in with a chance of winning one of the fantastic prizes on offer. Pop over to the challenge blog to see what is on offer but it's fab! There will be one grand prize winner and two second place winners!
Shape memory polymers (SMPs) can be deformed and fixed into a temporary shape and then recover their original permanent shape under external stimuli such as heat, explains lead researcher Hesheng Xia from Sichuan University, Chengdu. 'When a piece of polymer is placed in the body, it is subjected to heating at 37°C everywhere and the whole piece undergoes shape recovery,' he says. Xia and co-workers directed an ultrasound beam on a selected area of a polymer, causing a local rise in temperature and triggering shape recovery only in that area. Xia adds that ultrasound has the advantage of easily penetrating body tissue.
After about 10 hours the delirium sets in and you begin to find things annoying or funny. Things that you wouldn't normally find funny or annoying but you just cant help it. Especially if your in the part of the corridor affectionately named the isolation ward. This is due to the fact you are behind a glass fire door and blocked off from the normal conversations and banter. Sometimes its nice to rest there though. The peace and quiet can be calming and there's a chair!
So there you are! I loved making these, they looked so pretty and the finished result tasted much better than I would have imagined (and I imagined they'd taste pretty good anyway!) The frosting used was a cream cheese one, something I've mentioned having issues with on here before. But, after ditching the electric mixer in favour of my hand held mixer for this recipe I am a complete convert now! The frosting turned out brilliant, almost nicer than a straight-up buttercream. So, unless I get that fancy £300 mixer for Christmas, I'm sticking to a handheld mixer from now on.
The next week we went back into the village to get pictures of each child that was available for sponsorship and while I was working my photography skills on them, George was asking them 10 questions that I thought the sponsors might want to know about them:
Sorry I don't have any pictures right now. All my pictures are in limbo. They are on my old hard-drive and then I have some other pictures on two different flash drives, and some on an SD card. I have taken about 1000 pictures in the last week!!! I have been practicing a lot of new techniques and I am loving it!!!! I can't wait to show everyone!!
“Satan?”Junsu ask with calm and cold tone.
The age of hollow legged boys, tired in the morning but can stay awake all night type of boys.
salaamz
This photo does not show the colors correctly for some reason but, the left one is a teal color, the middle is black and the right is blue. There is also a red, orange, yellow and green one not pictured here.
-Break out the games. If you and your significant other enjoy board games, gather a few of your favorite games and have your own mini-tournament at the dining room table. My husband and I like to quiz each other using the Trivial Pursuit cards without playing the entire game. Make up your own rules. You can – you are a grown-up!
Left-wing BNP
September is a great time to get back to walking. The scenery is beautiful, and I am motivated to get in some walking now, before winter makes it nearly impossible.
I did look out for any blog land friends whilst at Ally Pally, but saw NO ONE. I had a great time though, always do.
Hubcaps really do make all the difference on a '96 Sentra.
You blew it. It seemed like your stage was going ok, but right around the end of the first turn the sous told you that you could take off. You considered protesting, but instead you decided to change, have a smoke and get a bite to eat. Sitting down at the bar, you order your food and a drink, and sometime later the chef tells you that you're welcome back anytime...but no job is discussed. And you dont ask about one. Your stage is over, and you wasted it. So how did this happen?
Neo is let out of the Matrix to live in the real world along with the rest of the surviving humans not under machine control. He is believed by some to be “the One” who was prophesied to end the war between man and machine and finally bring freedom to all humanity. “Whoa” indeed.
Although you can't quite see the stamping on the snaller butterflies, I've used all three of the background stamps that you'll find in this set - one on the orange butterflies, one on the yellow, and the last one on the main image panel in turquoise. The sentiment is also from Pumpkin Seed Sentiments.
Eight mismatched mittens,
So, maybe I need to mix in a salad or two into my day. And cut out the cheeses. And let go of the lattes. And run a few extra miles on my shorter run days.
I was mad at her for a long time over this and felt so sorry for dad who did his visiting on his own without her and mostly accompanied by me.
and that’s where we sit
"If a caveman had read poetry like this, he'd have strangled himself to prevent the eventual development of language."
Poverty is a palace so pitiable yet plum,
“Sinister. It just seemed wrong.”
Several foreign media reports have predicted that the Najib administration may have to postpone the 13th general election due to a possible negative backlash on the government over its handling of last Saturday’s protest.
The Koetong has been given the title of ‘the highest hotel in Victoria’ but what really caught my eye was Kelv’s description of the pool table rules. “20 cents a game – payable at the bar because the coin mechanism broke about fifteen years ago!”
You: Already?
Griffin and others contained that growth by quickly undermining branches in areas that growth had taken place in by sacking organisers where it did. East London was the first, followed by Oldham and Burnley later Bradford and Birmingham. The BNPs peak was contained and undermined by state ops working within.
I am using the blog today as a little bit of propaganda. It's not something I'd usually do, but it's my blog, so I guess I can do what I want.
The second article, Ambitious Law Firm is Reduced to Grim Dispatches paints a very distressing situation where a professional service provider, in this case a law firm is suffering the consequences of having service provider compensation get out of alignment with the relationship between service providers and Job Creators. It certainly resonates with us…..which provides us with an excellent opportunity for us to reach out to our clients and let them know that we “get it” and realize that without their continued risk taking, we would be nowhere. THANK YOU.
With my photography website and business card and registered LLC, I had almost attained a profession outside of work.
4. Marinated skirt steak for fajitas, $2.29/lb. at El Rancho Supermercado (through 11/2/10)
The next of many differences I present in this article is Heavenly Father and Jesus being one in the same. As Christians we believe the Bible when it tells us that Jesus Christ is God in flesh. To take away Jesus’ identity and place him next to another god with flesh and bones is definitely a different gospel.
Preheat oven to 190C/170C fan forced.
Latest Magazines: Alexander Skarsgard is featured in not one, but two magazines this month! Check out the scans here!
D.H: The Puppy Bowl is on Animal Planet.
On April 2nd we set off on the Cosmos Tour called “British Panorama”, it covered England, Scotland and Wales. It was the first time I had been on a bus tour, so I wasn’t sure what to expect. Now I do…expect great sights, excellent accommodation, a knowledgeable tour guide and lovely company.
We've had Rose on the back porch all winter, so we've become quite well acquainted ♥ She was friendly before, always riding on my arm, shoulders & head. This winter though, I've been her constant company when I'm outside.
But I don’t think they can teach parenting in books. Even medical ones. Or magazines. Experience means a lot. When they talk about limiting families to one child to control the population, I think that might spell the doom of mankind. What they really should do is give certain families license to Dugger-it big time, because it takes a few kids before you figure it out. The rest of us should not be allowed to reproduce at all. (It’s an idea anyway)
Okay, remember what I said yesterday about not sending me pictures of your pudgy significant other in his skivvies?
Please bear with me and normal service will be resumed soon.
Run Wear
I will have more to say about McCoy’s rather stunning demise at a later date.
Stamps: Church image (PSX), Cozy Winter (Serendipity)
All of our collections have been lovingly hand selected to ensure our range will look, feel and fit fabulously. Lula Lingerie offers its customers an exceptional choice from pretty everyday sets, right upto exquisite silk and lace lingerie for the more special occasion, alongside speciality ranges in bridal and maternity wear.
To their credit, Comrades have one last throw of the dice, but much of their energy is put into cod psychology, specifically in their insistence that Kristian Hewitt doesn't want the ball ' back there,' despite various dips of shoulders and side stepping that seem to clearly demonstrate to the contrary in his new position of last line of our defence. There's still time for more goalscoring chances. Chris Pye, who proved a constant threat, is unfortunate to see his lob return into play from the underside of the crossbar. Once again, we hadn't played particularly well. Hard work and a moment of inspiration had got us over the line.
Alfred Newman The Hurricane
This will be my last post about Paula Deen. She’s firmly committed to defending her brand and sweeping that ratings-lowering diabetes stuff under the rug–or at least relegating it to a bland website. I’m upset Novo Nordisk uses her as a spokesperson. Ms. Deen is modeling a lifestyle that far too many people already follow–take the prescribed pills and don’t worry about changing your lifestyle. But maybe that works out well for Novo Nordisk too. There’s a bright future for Victoza sales.
½ cup (2 oz/60 gm) almonds
I have no clue what to make for supper tonight. What goes with hot whiskey? I am making lasagna for Christmas Eve. It's a tradition, though perhaps unintentional by my parents. They for some reason seemed to make something Italian for Christmas Eve dinner. Not because we're Italian in anyway. Maybe because it was easy to make? My kids like it, too, and I hardly throw together a lasagna on any other night, so I might as well make the most of it. As you know, finding anything that BOTH my children like at the same time, is a potshot in the dark.
The day before the party, I filled each balloon with a small prize before inflating it. The smaller the object, the better! This proved to be a harder task than I anticipated. I used some really tiny party favors like plastic rings and necklaces, small animals, stickers, Tootsie Rolls, change, confetti, and a few lottery tickets that the adults enjoyed. One trick I learned was to turn the uninflated balloon inside out on your fingers and then turn it back right side out once the prize is in place. Think of it like you're folding a pair of socks. I also went ahead and splurged on the $1.99 balloon pump. Why didn't I buy one of those things sooner? Much easier on my lungs.
The Saints will then face two straight NFC South opponents, starting when they host Tampa Bay at the Superdome on Nov. 6 (noon CT). They will then travel to the Georgia Dome to face the Atlanta Falcons on Nov. 13. The game, which falls on the tenth week of the NFL season, marks the beginning of the NFL’s flex scheduling format and the contest, as well as four others are subject to be moved to different time slots. The game is slated to be kicked off at noon CT. The Saints will then have their bye in week 11. This will be the latest weekend the club has had off since the NFL’s institution of the bye system in 1990.
I need to know that I have your permission to give your email addy to Dean so that he can start sending you info re: our film project?? I’m really excited at the thought of you working with Dean and I to make this happen! (yay)
The mandate to remain hopeful, which seems to abound in Christian churches these days, is and always has been a challenge for me. I am moody, often dark – sometimes a glass-half-empty type. I know I’m supposed to hope. I aspire to hope. I intend to hope. I hope to hope. And sometimes I can. Other times . . .
I think Treyarch have shown a brave move with Black Ops 2, no other Call of Duty has ever tried to set itself so far into the future as this new installment has. The graphics and the visuals look great as ever, but from the trailer I can’t see any significant improvement in graphics. I also noticed, this game is to be set in the future right? Well then whats with the stationery vehicles and the clothing range? Both seem to be based on the fashions and car models of today, Treyarch should have thought this through and considered designing and modeling their own futuristic cars and clothing ranges.
For comparison, let’s look at the intensifier really. You can use really to intensify a predicative adjective (i.e., an adjective that comes after the linking verb be), as in
“Marcus, don’t tell me you haven’t Googled yourself.” I said. Marcus started making some lewd gestures referencing a certain body part and moving his arm up and down like he was cocking a gun. “And no Marcus, I’m not talking about that kind of ‘Googling yourself’! Now we all know what we’ll find when we Google Santorum.” I said under my breath. At that point Karen made a little coughing noise.
CCS has sapped investment in renewable power research. $1.8B in subsidy to nuclear recently.
Even the free samples quite often disguise an ebook not worth the money (Trust me, I have seen my screen seethe in agony, I wouldn't review them here since this isn't a book blog, and because of a self imposed rule of showcasing 3 stars and above books.) Should a reader avoid Amazon reviews and rely on word of mouth or book bloggers to find new authors, try only bloggers' books or stick to reliable paperbacks?
Stay close this month for further updates.
Julius Nyerere - President of Tanzania,
Papers are On The Bright Side-One, the stars were made with Spellbinders dies, the flag was cut with my MFT ribbon Die-namics, the sentiment is a Delta stamp that I picked up at Mike's or AC Moore, and the ric-rac is cut with another Die-namics die from MFT. All three stars are up on separate layers of foam tape and I added some quick machine stitching just to fill in that open area in the upper right-hand corner.
And generous it is – the PM gave the numbers at the Mainland Conference on Sunday and if memory serves me correctly, about 40% of tertiary funding goes in student support, more than twice that in Australia.
Yes, yes. The blanket ... perhaps the last blanket in the world of its kind. I do not know what I shall do if this beloved blankie is ever lost, for I cannot find another... not even on the internets.
*I would like to comment that anybody, regardless of their religion or lack thereof is allowed to pray.
02 (Sittin' on) The Dock of the Bay (Cropper, redding) 5:15
He had knocked the breath out of her. “Ju…Ju…,” she huffed. She crawled over to where her friend, Jumper, lay unconscious on the sidewalk. Everything was blurry. She rubbed her eyes hard, over and over, trying to clear them enough to see through the uncontrolled tears. She touched his chest, but her hand was shaking so badly that she couldn’t tell if he was breathing. She reached for his neck again, this time to check for a pulse.
(50% of the proceeds will be donated directly to their adoption agency)
Boil Size: 7.29 gal
In other words, “popular fiction,” “chick-lit,” “beach books.” Oh, please. I understand that many writers and publishers and critics care very much about the distinctions, which are handy labels for booksellers and librarians, but most readers don’t. They’re looking for good books of all kinds, and, yes, covers can signal appealing subject matter, but so what? The contents are what counts, and a great many readers happily turn the pages of Anne Tyler, Anne Rivers Siddons and Anne of Green Gables. (Also Anonymous, but that’s another story for another day.)
When I go to work this evening to sell Starburst and Peanut Butter Whoppers and Coca-Cola and Jennifer’s Body, I’m going to take off my shoes for a while. I’m going to go ahead and take the chance that there might be holy space at my job. Could be that I spend way too much time waiting for God to show up when, in fact, God is already there and he is waiting on me to show up, take off my shoes, and let Him speak.
Here the sun still lingers close to the horizon and it will be an hour before the moon
2. Place washed rice in a heavy-bottomed pot with a capacity of about 5 litres. Coat grains with the sesame oil. Add the stock (or water), salt, chicken and ginger.
HELLO!!!!!
the fear
Then came the electronic possibilities. Ebooks were born. And for a while it seemed these Ebooks would be the wave of the future and another great source of income just for publishers. Actually, most agents would not look at your work, if you published anything and I do mean anything of that book on the web. Ebooks looked like they were going to belong to publishers. For a moment in time.
87. Alcohaulin's Ass -- Hallyeah
The Gradys are back. And so is their archenemy.
This chance remark in 1996 was the catalyst that prompted Ali to start Crafty Ribbons, which she runs together with her husband Tony. Crafty Ribbons aim is to offer ribbon lovers and crafters a wide, varied and interesting choice from some of the worlds best ribbons, at affordable prices. We also design and manufacture our own range of ribboncraft kits, including ribbon embroidery, weaving, mitred patchwork, teddy bears, and cushions.
Canterbury Golding
Desperate to find Jude, Grace befriends Talbot, a newcomer to town. But as the two grow closer, Grace's relationship with Daniel is put in danger - in more ways than one.
Below is a brief description of the steps involved in getting the tortoises moved into their new home.
My Romantic Gothic Heart Chain Trapped in Black Resin Forever pendant is now for sale! I love this one. Who doesn't love the idea of hearts in black resin?! Hopefully it isn't just me.
Don't forget to add patterned paper to the bottom of your roof BEFORE adhering it to the wooden frame... just trust me! ;-)
Price: $26
*Although the original recipe calls for 30-40 minutes baking time for a 9 inch cake, I have always needed 40-50 minutes for an 8 inch cake in a convection oven.
The cast did a great job of pulling off a great show on both coasts, while getting visits from guest stars.
The cast is full of real people, reacting like real people would to a zombie apocalypse. Each in their own way is tough minded and determined to survive. The group is lead by two police officers and a survivalist. One policeman, Rick Grimes quietly sticks to his morals. His wife and boy are among the group. The second policeman, Shane Walsh was Grimes partner before his coma. Walsh will do anything to survive, especially if there are no witnesses. The survivalist is not the stereotypical southern redneck that he presents as in the first episode.
“Has it begun to sprout? Will it bloom this year?
Another trip to the NEC in Birmingham today, our third this year. Firstly the photography trade show in March, April saw us going to the Gadget Show and now we went to see the Beauty Show; a trade show about beauty and make-up.
Sookie’s character has mellowed down – that’s a wonderful feeling.
"Alberta"
One wonders what the football-going community (everything's a community today!) will make of this last week's events, and whether Gaddafi is still indeed a Taffy.
Ms A is always a light eater – so she opted for some steamed vegetables. Our waiter wasn’t satisfied with her choice though – and put a bit of pressure on her to have the Roti Bread as well. He just didn’t seem to understand that she really just wanted steamed vegies. She ended up ordering the bread to assuage him, but she didn’t really eat it in the end!! That was slightly bizarre – but I can appreciate he was just looking out for her – but perhaps if the customer insists a couple of times, maybe they know what they want.
To give a bit of context to new readers, at Macadamian we design and build products for other technology companies. We're a software consultancy whose mission in life is to help other technology companies create great software products. We want our customer's customers to be as passionate about our customer's software as they are about their iPod.
1) Division of labour: Where possible, queue at different counters to collect your free bags, luggage, lucky draws to cut down on queuing time.
I haven’t made any of these this year, but I need to as these are most often requested by my friends and I’m down to just 1 jar. These are a must in bloody mary’s and I just like eating them out of the jar as well. Do NOT cut the stem off of these. Just cut the stem end without cutting into the cavity of the pod.
James gave Oregon football its swagger. He gave college football’s fashion kings the right to wear different swag every week. He added to the joy that is Oregon Duck football. Here are some of the LaMichael James highlights.
GERRY ADAMS
I’ll cut to the good part if you don’t feel like reading the whole thing. We qualified 127 Outlaw Way followers for Regionals. That’s by my count (I’ve done it a couple times), and that’s including Masters. This is by no means a completed list, but is a good start. Read on…
Getting to the negatives first, the knife came unusable as a cutting device. I do know that I've never had a knife come out of the box with a worse edge. After using my Griptilian for nearly two months, did I feel the need to get the edge back into shape. This was done in about ten minutes with a set of Lanskey Croc Sticks. After nearly 20 minutes of work with the same, the improved edge still wouldn't cut the top off a tied plastic Walmart bag. I was warned by the single review on KnifeCenter, but I didn't not take it too seriously. To be perfectly honest, my sharpening skills are poor. That is my fault, but putting edges on metal is not my job. If I wanted to redo an edge into functional status I would be making my own knives and I'd have a RK mk1 subhilt on my hip and be busy selling you guys knives verses reviewing them. I have two fixed blades with not so great edges, however both are styles that are known for this very problem. One is a small double edged spear point, Fallkniven Garm, and the other is a single edged dagger point, Boker Trench. Neither broad enough to have the deep bellies that make for great cutters. The ECS-4 possess a modified spear point making this rather inexcusable when other examples like that on the Kershaw Skyline are excellent. As a result, I did not carry this but a few times just to see how it carried.
Step 1: Get plastic 'rouleaux' from your bank.
Owen: You have no idea! That night was one of the most difficult things I've ever done in my whole life. But, Charlotte is the most important thing in my life and seeing her happy is all I want, so I went along for her. I don't think anyone was expecting Cameron to show up and he's lucky that his Mom pulled him aside because I was just about to lose my cool with him. Especially after he called Charlotte his wife.
was it trickery?
Trying to make brunch plans for Mother's Day? McCoy's will be having a special Mother's Day brunch buffet, staring at 10 a.m. on Sunday, May 13. For $19.99 per person, you can treat your ma to great start to her day!
* If using thicker batting I trim a triangle off each corner of the block so there is less bulk at this area where I'm joining the blocks.
James W. Douglass in his documented book, JFK and the Unspeakable, attributes the assassination of President John F. Kennedy to the CIA, Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Secret Service. Douglas reports that these powerful government institutions were concerned by Kennedy’s refusal to approve Operation Northwoods, to back the CIA’s invasion of Cuba, and to confront the Soviets militarily over the Cuban missile crisis and by Kennedy’s plans to end US military intervention in Vietnam. JFK also told his brother Robert that after his re-election he was going to break the CIA into a thousand pieces.
to paint them with hope and love.
My husband travels a lot. He collects toiletries and various sundries from the hotel rooms and suites in which he stays. He’s stayed at suites with kitchenettes quite a bit lately, and brings back his used and unused dish detergents. He lines them up on our kitchen windowsill.
You must have virtual mailbox and verified account to use Oregon location.
After finding my wife having sex with another man in our home, I could not stomach staying in the house anymore. After the initial shock and dismay my first raw, gut impulse was, “You must get out of this place to save yourself.”
Many scores for the movies these days forge far into the advanced guard of music, without the public ever quite knowing it. The uses of dissonance and throughly modern concepts in film music is far greater than is generally recognized, but these ideas go to point up dramatic concepts rather than demonstrate a musical philosophy. Along with these tecniques, however, Hollywood composers have not abandoned the memorable themes that have consistently spread through their work. Not too long ago almost every dramatic film had a theme song that wound its way through the reels, changing in its mood and orchestration as the story progressed. Many of these themes gained popularity in their own right, and it is today's counterpart of those themes that Percy Faith presents so winningly in this collection.
Duplicate Content forgiveness went to the waste side in 2011. The Panda changes and launch of Google + beta encouraged us to share others content in social settings, but Google's Little or No Original Content and Webmaster Guidelines provide assurance that unique website content is still key with Google. Yahoo / Bing states the similar in their blog post explaining how to become an Authority Site which includes a bulleted list of what they look for to determine authority sites (unique content is one of the factors).
FDR: Of course, ELEANOR, of course. It’s done! (his eyes are alight) This will be the greatest experiment in the history of our country. We’ll call it — The New Deal.
160x: High-end estimate of the factor by which the rate of sexually transmitted infections in the promiscuous segment of the general public exceeds that in the escort population (see also “3-5%“, “2x” and “0.4%” below).
6. Rent a table for your business: Table rental costs $25 for 6 hours (contact Mr. Oshaben at 440-204-1773 or Marianne Prete at 440-396-7149 by Thursday, April 12th).
But I have to admit that The Tomboy's not so favourable characteristic seems to be definitely me, without a doubt. You see when I was little I had a short stint in hospital because I kept wetting myself. I was five. This was much to the horror of my mother (whose pride probably ended there) although still to this day she reckons I was potty trained at six months.
Following on from my ‘Fuckerflies’ series, as Christmas approaches and no-one can be bothered to answer their phones or are ‘ in a meeting’ (and it can only get worse as the Christmas party season gets under way), I am occupying part of my time each day by painting. Charonaletto has many spray cans and enough paint and canvas to flood the art market with tat. There is only one flaw to this ‘plan’. I give the paintings away… but I do offer the recipients an option where I throw the painting away for them and save them the trouble.
Bad Education
The past several years have found me engaged in various conversations with fellow Christian brothers and sisters. During the course of these conversations I have often found myself expressing to others that I have concerns about myself in respect to my salvation and in my progress we Christians call sanctification. There may have been a time when I might have come across as if I was questioning my eternal destination. As a Bible-believing Christian, let me state categorically that I believe in salvation by grace alone. As a potential Calvinist, (I can’t say that I have totally reached a final opinion on the strict five points of Calvinism) I tend to lean more on the work of God in my salvation than in my own participation in that progress. I do not care to debate that topic here, I am just pointing out where I am right now in my personal theology. Recent times have allowed me to believe I am a saved, born again Christian, who is headed to Heaven upon my personal demise.
I pointed out that they were worse because, unlike tobacco, they are promoting smokers as unemployable and trying to take away their right to make any kind of living so to me a salary is personal wealth and they are raking it in on the back of the hate they create for one particular consumer group.
BEHIND EVERY GREAT BLOG ... IS AN UNFED HUSBAND I definitely hope this will be a great blog, and I've never been the chef at our house, but another one of my goals for the year is to plan a menu each month and to try lots of new recipes!
Also, before the rules which would be introduced at the end of the 18th century and further developed in the 19th century it was much more of a ‘no holds barred’ form of conflict. Quick research into fighting manuals and instruction books of the day will provide evidence of throws and locks, eye-gouging, head-butting and even open palmed strikes. There are even indicators that kicking was involved. Certainly when an opponent got you to the ground he was allowed to kick you where you lay, a practice known as ‘purring’. This sounds so rough and ready that many readers may form the impression that such combat was just scrappy ‘free for all’ brawling.
Guthrie: I mean the commonwealth
Comedian Stevie Mack is the Writer/Host of the number one online comedy talk show!
"If there is light in the soul, There will be beauty in the person. If there is beauty in the person, There will be harmony in the house. If there is harmony in the house, There will be order in the nation. If there is order in the nation, There will be peace in the world."
Was Rawlings successful? The fact that the Constitution actually prevented Rawlings from running again might be a measure of that success. Ghana is still poor. It is staggering, like many developing countries, under a lot of debt.
Consultant Bryan Kennedy, 54, who travels regularly on business, said he had never seen queues as bad at Gatwick. Mr Kennedy, who was returning from Barcelona, said: “I arrived at 8.30pm and some people had already been there for hours before me. The guy standing next to me said the driver sent to pick him up had been waiting for 90 minutes.”
I hate washing jeans. I hate washing sweat pants. And I especially hate it if I have to wash them because they’re dirty. However in the past few years I have adopted a new sense of fashion, it’s all the rage for people who miss their mouths, it’s called “I like to wear my food (and drink if I’m really not paying attention)”. I have a blue top that I have got to the point that I will not wear if I know I will be eating a meal because I think it’s spent more time being sprayed with stain remover, in the washer and on the line than it has on my body.
This image shows the Hems workshop, and is seemingly deserted. We know Hems was an incredible self-publicist, obsessed by appearance (see the image at the top), so whenever I look at this image (the image just abive), I wonder first who took it; second what it was aimed to show and to whom, and thirdly whether the white statue that seems to glare back at the viewer had a particular significance for the person who took the image. Whereas the first image shows the artist at work, this image shows the tools and even processes of production. Production of what, you may ask… of appearance?
An answer to my prayers, a country road opened up,
I then repeated the process with the houses and sun on stickyback canvas, cut them out and layered onto the canvas board with glue gel. I die-cut the fence from painted sticky back canvas and using glue gel again adhered it to the canvas either side of the middle house.
Saving Private Ryan revolutionized war movies (a longtime anchor genre in film history). I know this doesn’t really mean a lot to many people, but Steven Spielberg made war movie that makes every war movie made prior to it seem watered down in comparison, I think the most amazing thing about it is that you’re never once thinking “wow… that was gratuitous” (as opposed to a movie like… The Passion of the Christ where I spent most of it thinking “Wow… that was gratuitous”).
Powdered sugar1/4cup
“‘Cause I totally went-off on her. My mom’s gonna go ballistic when she hears that. She’ll take away my boogie board and ground me for life.” He sighed heavily. “You’re looking at a dead man walking.”
ブッダ：葉っぱ持ってないよ。
One are those that have come here illegally, 11 million. The second is the group of people who are brought over by coyotes and who are in many cases abused by virtue of coming into this country illegally. And the third, are the four to five million people who are waiting at home in their own nations trying to get here legally. They have family members here asking them to come here. Grandparents and uncles and aunts. Those are the people we have a responsibility for. And the second group as well, those that are abused. We — we’re concerned about them.
With the influx of technology-based games these days, it seems like there are fewer and fewer Barrel Of Monkeys games out there in stores. It’s a shame, as it really is a classic. (By-the-by – what’s with the newer Barrels containing only red monkeys? The blue ones were always my favourite. And having the monkeys in primary colours is a great introduction for young artists to colour theory!)
Pairings: Cheese: sharp aged Cheddar
#2. Breakfast in the kitchen– my “fave”* Blackberry scones, sunshine and making plans for the day. Perfect.
- All work is seed sown. It grows and spreads, and sows itself anew. ~ Thomas Carlyle
It’s also the day after the Taylor’s University Annual Ball where I had returned home at 2.30 am! I know I’m not on top form on this day and I looked and felt completely stoned. Even Levin professes to be fearful of me as I’m not my usual self. However I am only exhausted, not moody.
People I know, people I call friends (people who I have met in real life, compared to my dear on-line friends) included, post stuff on blogs, social network sites and they send me messages. The blogs and posts I try to read them all. I click the like button so they know I’ve been around. But often it’s becoming too hard to write a decent reply. E-mails go unanswered for some days. I feel guilty because of my “lack of interest”. But it isn’t that. I know that. I know it’s my mental health screwing me to feel this way. I already feel bad about myself and due to my behavior caused by my depression, I feel like the worst friend ever… Which only causes me to stay in my downward spiral…
If not as steady, and
Last night I watched again Martin Crawford's DVD 'A Forest Garden Year'. Building on the work of Robert Hart, Crawford, who lives close by, promotes a permaculture lifestyle based on agroforestry, where the natural conditions of a woodland garden are followed to provide a genuinely sustainable method of food production based on perennial crops that work in synergy with each other. (Crawford is also developing any number of fruit and nut species that yield well in the British climate; the increase in which is one advantage of global warming.)
The society is reluctant to acknowledge that females could be perpetrators and males could be victims. It is a hard thing for the victims to come forward due to the feeling of powerlessness and other aspects.
“The Schechter Institute, its leadership and most of its student body adamantly object, purely from a halachic point of view, to the ordination of gays and lesbians,” said Dubi Hayun, one of the teachers at the school. “The American students' request is thus utterly disrespectful. It is tantamount to coming to a vegetarian’s home and eating a big, fat steak.”
So strange. They started giving out the NFL Offensive player of the Year in 1972 -- and the first six years the OPOY was the same as the MVP. In 1978, for the first time, they diverged -- running back Earl Campbell won OPOY, quarterback Terry Bradshaw the MVP. I guess I can see that. Two different positions. Two different responsibilities. I suppose you can make an argument that a quarterback could be more valuable than a running back. It happened again in 1980 when Campbell was OPOY and my hero Brian Sipe was MVP.
As an accomplished poet, Wandrei was the first to write a series of sonnets for Weird Tales, “Sonnets of the Midnight Hours.” Lovecraft liked the idea so much, he embarked on his own series, Fungi From Yuggoth.” Robert E. Howard also wrote his own series with “Sonnets out of Bedlam.”
chipolatas (if I can find them)
There is one local runner that (I think) has the form, speed, and relative lightness to run barefoot on rocky trails fairly successfully...and that is "Barefoot" Josh Snellink. While I've seen him injure and bloody himself a time or two, he has a "realistic view" of what is possible with barefoot running (IMHO), and when it makes sense to wear shoes, to prevent injury or frostbite. For Josh to run absolutely barefoot on our local rocky trails, he needs to be obsessively observant of trail conditions, but he also needs to slow down on the downhills. This guy is no slouch...if he were wearing some type shoes and could run at his normal and (beautiful to watch) fluid pace - even on the descents, I think he would cruise to victory in quite a few races.
Boomers' Song began as a daily on January 6 1986, a Sunday seems to have been added a tiny bit late, on January 19, and the strip ran until September 10 1989. According to Horsey, who commented on the strip in Greatest Hits of the '80s, the strip never had more than 65 clients, and he was relieved when the strip was withdrawn from syndication.
So when I heard there was a special display of James Bond vehicles marking the 50th year of ‘Bond in Motion’, I felt sure there should at least be something to look at to hold off the “can we go now” mantra that all children perfect from an early age.
The me before I started to cook, followed by the me in culinary school, which led to the me as line cook....every step of the way there was change. Becoming a sous chef only accelerated things. And changing kitchens? Forget about it. Sometimes I think about all the people I used to know, and all things I used to do. It's foreign. There is little to no nostalgia involved. My only memories are what feel like someone elses war story. So where are you now? Who do you know from your past life? How has cooking changed you?
More importantly, Proclamation No. 1801 covers not only Boracay Island, but sixty-four (64) other islands, coves, and peninsulas in the Philippines, such as Fortune and Verde Islands in Batangas, Port Galera in Oriental Mindoro, Panglao and Balicasag Islands in Bohol, Coron Island, Puerto Princesa and surrounding areas in Palawan, Camiguin Island in Cagayan de Oro, and Misamis Oriental, to name a few. If the designation of Boracay Island as tourist zone makes it alienable and disposable by virtue of Proclamation No. 1801, all the other areas mentioned would likewise be declared wide open for private disposition. That could not have been, and is clearly beyond, the intent of the proclamation.
Notice: no refunds. Once we make the sale through PayPal all sales are final.
And then there were 6, and I froze, as one last man appeared and stood across the last small gap between their human chain and the entrance to the trail, tilting his head back and looking me over through slitted eyes, spreading his legs apart as if expecting some sort of impact, as if to lower his center of gravity, with arms crossed.
It stands to reason that the more complex our tax code is, the more open it is to abuse. So, we’re making it simple to make it fair. America’s tax plan will do away with special breaks for a few so we can lower the tax rates for all. Our simpler, three-bracket design will assure that no American pays one penny more than his fair share.
also, we haf a new woofie furriend named mr chewy. he is sendin' us a buncha treats an' foods, an' we'll let you know how we likes 'em in the comin' weeks!!
Are we also conditioned to obey? I thought bitterly.
Amazon announced this week that it will no longer send books, CDs and DVDs to South African customers without imposing a penalty surcharge that costs more than the product because so many of them go AWOL in transit.
What type of products being offered by your company, and their application areas? Also tell us that how your products have an edge over competitors?
Tapping of Indians Victory Lager at 6:30pm
This way more people can find their way here and
“Oh,” she said, as if humoring a mentally challenged child. “They’re, like, search engine terms. Like when you type in the first few letters on Google, and it fills it in for you?”
“That brave girl today, not only did she get lucky getting away, she put a monster behind bars where he belongs,” said father Joe Ocasio.
6 go
I have so much I want to say about our experiences in Ethiopia. About the orphanages. About the donations. About the surreal day I clutched my baby girl to my chest as DH clutched our baby boy to his in the back of a very old Toyota (there are no car seats in Ethiopia) as we made our way on the muddied, nearly washed out roads towards the US Embassy, where we raised our right hands and talked through glass on a little phone to an anonymous worker on the other side, and in five minutes they were ours....I want to talk about it all but for now, I will just leave you with a few photos for your viewing pleasure:
Voodoo
The top two teams of the region automatically go to the Summer Olymics. Though there’d be some bragging rights to winning CONCACAF’s Olympic qualifying tournament, the real goal was getting out of semis. And, Mexico did just that in a 3-1 victory over Canada. Tomorrow is the final.
The Good News upside to all this, though, is that there are no Council Taxes/rates.
In the 1970's this place was 25 acres, now has spread to over 60. But in more than doubling the size of the zoo, there's obviously been a few causalities over the years, and one of them stares you in the face, the moment you set foot outside the 'Orangutan Forest' enclosure. There, right in front of you are the ruins of an 800 year old church - All Saints. I certainly don't remember that being there in the 1970's!
This first picture is taken from the closet door looking back to where the actual construction was done. If you look at the floor near the edge of the door, those cut out areas of the carpet is where the office closet used to be.
Each week I link up at the Pleated Poppy for What I Wore Wednesday. Mainly because I gain such inspiration from these ladies and their outfits. My clothes are mainly thrift store purchases from Goodwill and Salvation Army. I love my skirts and usually wear them more than dress pants/slacks; this week however it's mostly slacks with one skirt style. Plus touches of color and one off the chain bright day.
I’ll hold your hand
Moon, the Mod whippet didn't hear anything else. All he saw was fur and a blur! Dogs were moving in front of his vision and away again. Moon could feel paws patting him on the back.
Artist: Gordon Ross (1872 - 1946)
These corresponding ideas – “gay-makeovers, irish parade, great sex” – will forever become branded in the minds of these ex-lumberjacks assuring that next year’s petition to allow the gays to march will be signed by every straight man in the five boroughs, if not the entire tri-state area.
"Yes, but..." said the Sadness suspiciously, "why don't you run away from me? Aren't you afraid?"
Does this describe your organization??
Todd Usry, Brew Master
1. Did I mention, I am PREGNANT!??!!?!!??!!!
i'm completely and totally over-the-moon emotional when it comes to this boy!)
No matter where she goes.
Secondly, and more critically, they have uploaded a draft of the upcoming PEMRA Content Regulations 2012 – the code of conduct that local broadcasters will be bound to. The regulatory body has also called on the public to email their feedback before May 07, 2012, after which the code will presumably be finalized.
When I have pictures, I will post.
WITNESS: Oral.
I'm turning twenty in March.
She have to go the park where do filming. Oh, no she was caught up in many accidents!
Unlocked gate. How much do you want to bet that unwanted visitors only think there is a gate there in case a horse gets loose and open the gate in and walk in anyway??
This is the first set, they are coming from my heart. I was smiling the entire time I cut, baked, cooled and frosted these wee little bite size hearts. They are just in time for Valentine's Day. The cookie is a tender sugar cookie, baked to perfection then frosted with royal icing. A match made in heaven. They come in sweet vanilla, lemon or cinnamon.
It used to be that economists argued that outsourcing wouldn’t be problematic here in the US as long as we had enough growth in spite of the outsourcing that Americans would still have jobs. In order for that to happen, we would need to stimulate the economy – preferably through monetary policy. As it is, fiscal policy is crippled because of politics and monetary policy is crippled because of an overly conservative Federal Reserve unwilling to bend to the need of the unemployed.
And coming up:
This afternoon was a good one, quality time with my girl and extra yummy brownies.
Sc in the last 8 Sts. Ch 1. Turn.
Lesson: You don’t always know your audience as well as you think you do. What matters isn’t intent, but performance. It’s absolutely important to put thought into your content, designs, campaigns, and other website aspects. But it’s equally important to follow up and find out where you were on the mark, and where you had room for improvement. Analytics can give you the information you need about traffic, links, bounce rates, social sharing and more. Move forward with your site making informed choices, not speculative ones.
And so be it dear child. And I shall come and return again, as did Jesus Christ. Go hither. Go yond. For we are the beings of Light that you seek. We are the beings that of which you speak. Go yond. Go hither and find your way. An angel, a star, a galaxy away. For here we await your Glory Divine, and all shall unfold in earth angel’s time.
Other partners of ours have done it with a status just like ours, noobs, just heading out of the gates. We have gotten together with them to find out how they did it and have plugged in our own personal attention in regards to their feedback, but we still need you. To hit a status of 10,000 views on our site would be a mile stone and just the beginning. Help us help you and join us, spread the word about Clockworx Gaming and get plugged in.. You wont be disappointed.
Extracted from Bryce's Insider Guide To Paris
In Siberia a geological group drilled a hole about 14.4 kilometers deep in the crust of the earth and saying that they heard human screams. First they heard a high pitched sound, they thought the sound was from their digging devices. After some adjustments: They heard a terrifying screams…, not just screams of a single human, but screams of millions human voice, a screams of pain.
An NHS Athens account may be required to view this in full.
in the eye,
It was wonderful working with this Madagascan guy, Justin
2 Tbsp Armagnac, cognac or brandy
Spam hit the Wordpress site almost as soon as I put it up. The first-comment-approval system catches all of it, other than the bits the spam-filter takes away. Spam is platform-independent unfortunately, no matter where you go, the spammers follow. I'll keep an eye on the Wordpress spam filter in case it gets over-zealous!
It's not hard to imagine the Dukes of Stratosphear as a genuine 1960s psychedelic supergroup -- they could have been the band that inspired the Beatles, Hollies, Yardbirds, Pink Floyd, and many others.
piece yet. lol. We got this piece from his parents many years ago. They had it in a shop that
But the closure of Manfredi's gallery is not just bad news for artists: Cam is located in a socially deprived part of Naples, and museums are not only dedicated to educated people and tourists. If Cam is forced to close its doors, it would be bad news for the local people of Naples too. If enough of them flocked to the museum or sponsored a painting or two, it wouldn’t be in the financial mess, would it?
Old Lady: “You could’ve asked a little nicer.”
Tilda with wrapped heart
chilled raspberry soup with whipped cream and mint
3/4 palm sugar (you can use brown sugar)
Entree/Snacks:
Smart, Safe and Happy training everyone!
PS. Be sure to join the site so you can enter the giveaway!
Cut the potatoes and onion on the cutting board with the kitchen knife into pieces that are able to fit into the tube of the food processor.
(he comes out naked, covered in Saran Wrap)
She came out of school in much the same vein – very solemn, very pale. She didn’t say much on the way home and had a MASSIVE meltdown as soon as we got home – guess she saved it up. Fortunately T got out of the way quickly, she was very cuddly afterwards.
We would be 30 weeks gestationally today. Ella is 4 weeks 4 days old.
Anyway I was listening to the radio and was surprised to hear that while some people live in dread of impending home foreclosures, others are impatient with the banks for not foreclosing on their homes quickly enough. Why? Because the value of their home has dropped so significantly that they do not want to pay their mortgage anymore. They'd rather let the bank take the property so they can buy a similar home at a fraction of the cost.
May his memory be eternal!
Other issues that Richard Hooper mentioned are:
Bake for about 15 minutes, or until the chicken is cooked through. Let the chicken rest on the rack for about 5 minutes before serving.
“Twenty dollars.”
I can’t believe that I haven’t told you about our first CSA box for this season!! It started one week earlier than anticipated due to the strawberries coming in! I can’t believe we are already slurping fresh, local, organic strawberries. And they are just as delicious as we remember them.
Please feel free to use the pattern in any way, but please credit me for the pattern. Thanks and happy hooking
Running Time: 125 minutes
Until then – happy trails and God Bless,
Simply Love that anticipation!!
Support 13 on any major credit card and for your $1250 gold level contribution: we’ll thank you with two prime orchestra or front arena side tickets plus the DVD Andrea Bocelli “Concerto, One Night in Central Park.*” Pledge at the $1000 Silver level for two tickets in the back orchestra and lower arena sides plus the DVD. Finally, for your $750 bronze level contribution, receive two lower-level rear tickets and the concerto DVD.
But that’s not the point.
Lemon zest in a bowl.
Ahem. OK, so if you are into zombies, you want this book. If you are into "all the adults die, now what do the kids do" books, you want this book.
Back in her own room the staff gently closed the door and I leaned forward and introduced myself.
the extended 8’’+ 6’’ 2 tier cake is my most popular wedding design style. Decorated with a sweet piped design on the side and a delicate feature flower it makes the dream cake for modern brides.
– (long silence)
I know, I know. Terrible idea, right? But this really is just a natural progression for us. You see, the two of us have a saying: We shall only embark on a dream if it's widely considered to be a terrible idea. Last year, I was a shooting instructor for the blind. The year before that, Kristy worked as the hot-tub cleaner at the Jersey Shore mansion. And the year before that, I was a bull-fighter.
You only have to look at pictures of old Birmingham, which show a fine Victorian city with buildings like Snow Hill station, which was like a cathedral in its proportions; the Woodman, a glorious Victorian pub; and the old library, to see the wanton destruction so often perpetrated by local authorities. The Bull Ring shopping area was redeveloped in the 1960s, and was so ugly, so unpopular and so badly constructed that it has since been redeveloped.
either
Of course, I did need something to glitter. I cut a circle out of a piece of lightweight cardboard, fortunately recycling day is only once every two weeks so I had a good supply! I spread the circle liberally with Martha Stewart glitter glue and poured my German glass glitter on top. I worked on a piece of tin foil so that I could pour the excess glitter back into the little bag.
Interestingly, it might not be the recovered emails themselves that cause Mr Bird most trouble, but instead the fact that they never disappeared at all. On one view there was action taken and replies given which prevented information legitimately sought by the defence from being put before the court. That evidence might have been of no use to Mr Sheridan – in fact it might even, depending on what it said, have harmed his defence, but the Scottish Editor of the NotW, whether unintentionally or not, acted so as to deprive the court of relevant information.
Remarkable photography has been produced by people using everything from shoebox pinhole cameras to toy cameras, to technical view cameras, through to the latest sophisticated digital cameras. Not having the latest lens or camera is no barrier to producing remarkable work.
Professor Rashib: Have you finished the tasks I have given you?
A Chinese national and Singapore PR Zhang Yuanyuan who worked as a teacher in a private institution in Singapore revealed to the media that she became a PR within 2 months of application.
I remember being in high school and being teased about my weight incessantly. Because of this, I learnt that you should never ever judge a book by it’s cover. Ok, so someone might be what is deemed “fat” but they may have had a wicked sense of humor, been a great friend or been just like me, craving acceptance that their belly wouldn’t let them have. I don’t tease or belittle anyone for their size because I know that being big is not always a choice.
A Silent Storm
And a few weeks ago when I started this blog, it popped up again when I thought seriously about the significance of music in my life and why I feel the urge to write about music and imagination and the inter-connectedness of things. Pythagoras’ theory of ‘musica universalis’ or the ‘music of spheres’ is very publicised and still utterly mysterious to me. But I love the whole concept of the universe being in harmony and some sort of cosmic-mathematical-musical quintessence linking us all together.
is only a mask
2. Fountain Pens. High Cost Version. Skip this section. Again, unless it's on their list as a HAVE to HAVE Christmas item and you know exactly what the person wants...don't don't do it. Just being expensive does not mean that the person will love/use it. And...unless you know what you are doing, avoid used fountain pens on eBay, yes there are some great deals out there but its not that unusual to buy a fountain pen on eBay needs some work. Not a cool gift. It's easy to spend $1000 on a fountain pen, it's not easy to sneak in how much you paid for it to the person that has no idea what you just bought them. I will admit the Vanishing Point by Pilot is still pretty sweet. It's not for the novice, but a really fine gift for those who know their way around a pen.
Will we be getting our fairytale ending? I wonder. I wonder. I enjoyed reading Fins are Forever, I didn't love it but it was good and I liked reading it. I'm quite sure everything will go alright at the end. But what if Tera decides to surprise us again? Oh no.
I don’t know—what are your thoughts?
There are so many times when I'm in the mood to read a domestic magazine but while I'm doing so I'm thinking that I should be reading my Bible or at least a devotional. I just found this magazine the other day and was so excited. It has some great articles that are Christian based and they have guest writers and some amazing testimonies, they also have recipes and decorating ideas. There is a calendar to help you read the Bible in a year.I just wanted to share this with everyone because I think that you may enjoy it as much as I did.
Here we are just before the Book&Author breakfast.
I try not to have Oreos around the house because once
10 - Bewitched
I'm absolutely thrilled to share with you these pictures of the lovely Marianne of
2 Chrystal Belle Scrodd - Death (Vocal Version by Diana Rogerson)
watching for
Unless you were in the pool,
Anyway, my MIL soon learned that indeed little ones do know who it is, when Emily seen the quilt and shouted 'Noddy!!!!'. Noddy has been revamped & modernised. Emily loves watching it... (and so does Nathan sometimes!).
Whatever camp you are in, PCI remains a fact of life for all merchants that want to accept credit cards for the foreseeable future. So, while new and innovative payment methods and payment systems are interesting, it seems illogical for a retailer to risk losing their ability to accept Visa, MasterCard, and Discover payments by failing a PCI audit due to unsanctioned technology.
Ray Graham (RB Pitt)- Graham had over 200 yards and three touchdowns. Although they were against Buffalo, hardly a MAC powerhouse, they were impressive numbers. What impresses us most about Graham is his ability to break away from tackles. He doesn’t have the most amazing speed, but he is elusive.
Of course, we can always look to the apostle Paul as an example:
Nice to be back for my regular Wednesday blog post after a vacation to another realm of social media. I dove head first into Facebook. Learned so much, connected with so many old friends, and had such a good time that my husband prevailed on me to set up a Facebook account for him, too. When his super-tech son, Denny Jr., found out, he posted, “OMG, my pop has made hell freeze over!”
I hope it's not too arrogant of me to suggest that I "spread the word" about pubs more widely than Mr Deltics 1975-82 on VHS. But I have never - in my life - walked into any pub and either demanded or expected a free or discounted drink because of who I am, or what I do. If I did, I would expect and deserve to be called a complete and utter fucking twat by anyone who witnessed it.
Today I am back to clean eating and am kicking my cardio back up to full par. My body is feeling stronger everyday.
If it wasn’t so tragic I would laugh.
It is good to see ourselves as others see us. Try as we may, we are never
Where I’m going:
Perhaps Tati is present in the film. In addition to a brief scene featuring Mon Oncle playing in an old theater, Chomet has captured Tati/Hulot’s postures, gait, and mannerisms perfectly. The magician carries an umbrella and even wears the same bow-tie and raincoat and, in one scene, even has the hat of Mr. Hulot. The magician has the same awkward second-guess step and toe-tilting rigidity and balance that Mr. Hulot possessed. His hands always find their way to his hips or outstretched innocently behind him. The magician is a lovingly molded caricature. Where the characters in Triplets and Old Lady were hilariously grotesque exaggerations, the characters of The Illusionist seem to be sculpted with more compassion. Much like Wall-e, the magician’s relative silence and absence of a wide range of facial expression do not hinder the audience from understanding exactly what is transpiring in that little animated brain. His quiet demeanor only give us more understanding of his plight and give him more sympathy.
The responding police officer then found the dog as animal services crews were on their way to the scene. The pitbull charged at the officer, who then fired two shots, striking the animal.
A few years ago I would never have thought that doing photography and graphic design work would lead to two video/music/art collaboration projects that involved working with someone across the pond but these experiences have been so much fun, educational and provide income! And I have to say the two Marks are fantastic to work with, which is rare when it comes to multiple artists trying to work together on one project…I mean we do tend to be emotional, sensitive and opinionated! LOL.
So, we took the big kids out to the bus and on our way back in and over the gate....
1. Essay is the required length.
For example, a friend might say, “I can’t stand Roger. Look, I got a photo of him going to the bathroom on the field trip. Let’s see how many people we can send this to.”
Immediately before coming forward to receive the Lord in Holy Communion, we welcome the Lord:
I love the tears of a warrior though. They tell of a depth from which his passion receives its nourishment. Did not our Lord cry? Yes he did, and for that I am very thankful. In fact, a Christian who can not or will not cry frightens me. Life is too beautiful and too tragic not to rend the softened heart and to wring the tears from the eyes of the saints. A sunrise in its beauty and a genocide in its ugliness are both a part of what makes a man a warrior. The genocide tells him that things are not all well and that something must be done, the sunrise tells him that things are not all evil and that something good is being done. The genocide is his impetus and the sunrise is his strength.
Sr. Ellen coordinates greeters to meet Korea flights bringing babies to their adoptive families. These are volunteers ranging from college age to the 80s. Most are women, though some men are available at times. Sr. Ellen spends hours calling and arranging for enough greeters for each day -- sometimes 7-10 people per week!
If the recipients of SFI sign for the book, that now makes them legally liable for being aware of its contents.
- Most restaurant workers know this, but you can turn the wooden restaurant high chairs upside down to hold an infant car seat.*
so there you go, do pop along to sandras blog and join in the fun.i was doubting my card i posted earlier but looking at this i can really see that i have improved and i should stop being so hard on myself.see you in the morning.
If there is something I could ban in the police / mental health debate, it would be the use of the word ‘diversion’: literally, banned! Perhaps we could legislate?! And ‘liaison’ isn’t much better and should also be avoided. Let me explain:
1/2 tsp cayenne (or to taste. this stuff is spicy! wow!)
I know it's been several weeks since I've posted anything significant, and I hope my fellow bloggers won't kick me off their blogrolls for inactivity. I'm trying to put parts of my life together--more on that later--and I just haven't had time to think about my card collection in a while. Thank you so much to my 26 loyal followers and I promise to start posting again soon.
Huimin Jin, Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. Media as Relation and Relation as Truth: A Comparative Study of McLuhan and Confucius
Topps Chrome is one of the new releases I enjoyed a lot in 2011. I originally began the set by chasing favorite players and players on favorite teams, but eventually I found that I was well on my way to collecting this set - especially since I'm not worries about completing all of the various parallels.
Nome do Lab: Online Backup Service for Windows Server “8″
1 burst
Linen stole muffler (Light beige): Creamshop (no longer available)
and glitter
I see it differently. If you hire me and start out by giving me a wage that is less than I need to live a decent, pleasant life, you have already made me your enemy before I’ve even started working. And this is because you have proven that you don’t value me. You don’t think my life has worth and meaning. You want my heart and sweat and life blood, and you hold all that so cheaply you won’t give me a fair price for it. How could I not regard you as an enemy?
for the new week and spring in the air: pink & pastel overload.
Possibly coming up in a later post: a few remarks inspired by the Creative Time Summit (a few visuals here). For now I'll just mention, first, that they have a great website with, I believe, videos of more or less all the presentations, here; and second, that the instigator of the Perpetual Peace project (see pics sprinkled among the New Museum vizis, such as this one) was among the speakers, and he explained that it was a "secret" article by Kant that was the foundation for the U.N., and that the little booklet displayed at the New Museum contains this secret article.
So if you stand in a supermarket this summer and watch someone, distrait, buying 30 coathangers, seven light bulbs, two dustbins, a machete and some chickenwire, smile kindly, hold her list safely as she seeks to stuff it all in the trolley, and maybe buy her a doughnut to keep her sugar levels up.
7. Add sugar and simmer and cook for another 8- 10 mins.
But, the fact that Germany suffered this “vile oppression”, and that it created the conditions of despair that facilitated Hitler's victory did not lead Trotsky to in any way, consider the atrocities of the Nazis, against Jews, socialists, and German workers, any more justified as a consequence. He recognised Hitler as the worker's main enemy inside Germany, that the workers had to be organised to fight.
Obviously, the first post is not only a polish post, but it's a Julep polish post. Aside from the Maven boxes, I'd never picked out any polishes from their site and ordered independently, but I had a code for a free bottle that I had to use so I got to ordering (such hard work really.) I should say that while the normal price of Julep polishes is a bit outlandish at $14 each, their Mavens do get pretty nice service. Not only is shipping free, Mavens get 20% off, making polishes $11.20. Still not a bargain, but a bit more palatable.
It was too long to have the munchkins cared for by someone else,
its my and your's favourite month december..so i was thinking about a sweet little christmas giveaway...
we be content, gracious God, to hear the cavilling of unreasonable men;
Even how I act in public should represent WHO I am as a person. I do not believe that you can claim to be one way but act in another way and expect to be credible. I believe that we represent those we are involved with (including our employers) and have to keep that in mind with our daily actions and interactions.
Brawny-Warrior Yong Sol reports that he searched the black market for poison dealers but was too late for the dealer was already dead when he arrived. Now, that’s even more suspicious. He found out that the primary poison the dealer sold was arsenic – white powder poision.
Nate: (lots of giggles) And now I'm thinking about toy trains!
The book’s subtitle—How a Computer Formula, Big Ideas, and the Best of Intentions Burned Down New York City—And Determined the Future of Cities—is shockingly fascinating, or should be for anyone with a do-gooder bent (maybe especially for those of us who went to liberal arts schools and have a propensity for social justice). The Fires is an excellently written and fascinating account of various modes of information—experiential vs. numbers-based—being deployed, with the very very best ideals and hopes possible, for the sake of making New York City better. Maybe this, last: the very best books, at least to me, are those which make me think every single other thing in the world somehow relates to them (yes, I’m absolutely one of those dorks who finds connections to DFWallace’s writing in just about everything, though ditto J. Graham and Richard Powers and Conover and the rest of the folks I huff and puff about here). And I’m presently 100% seeing everything through lenses tempered by The Fires. Please, please get behind this book: you owe it to yourself to read something this great, and we all owe it to our cities to read such riveting, fantastic history.
Maybe I'm just getting older, but more things tend to fascinate me these days. Take this guy, for instance. It's called "space painting" and he uses regular everyday spray paint, poster board and newspapers and magazines. The results are out of this world. Literally.
Jamie Moore was born on January 31, 1985. He is the son of Brighton trainer and former jockey Gary and brother of former champion Flat jockey Ryan. Another brother Josh is currently a conditional jockey and sister Hayley has ridden as an amateur on the Flat as well as commentated on races. He qualified to ride in the 2003 John Smith’s Grand National only at the last minute with trebles on consecutive racing days at Haydock and Plumpton the week before the race and completed when 13th on Royal Predica. Moore was originally attached to Martin Pipe’s stable but went freelance in July, 2005. He turned professional at the end of the 2002/03 season and his big wins include a dead-heat first place on Horus in the Vodafone Gold Cup at Newbury and a clear-cut success for It Takes Time in the Ascot Chase. He was champion conditional in 2003/04 with 48 wins. He has already twice enjoyed victory over the National fences on Dunbrody Millar in the 2007 John Smith’s Topham Chase and on Endless Power in the 2008 Grand Sefton Chase. He also had a big-race victory on Heathcote in the 2007 Betfair Trophy at Newbury. Last season he gained a Grade Two victory on Sire De Grugy in the Dovecote Novices’ Hurdle at Kempton. The horse has developed into a high-class hurdler this season with placed efforts in the Betfair Hurdle and the Imperial Cup at Sandown. Other flagbearers for Moore include Fruity O’Rooney, who won at Kempton over Christmas prior to placed efforts in the Sky Bet Chase and JLT Specialty Chase at the Cheltenham Festival this year. John Smith’sGrand National Record: 2003 Royal Predica (13th); 2006 Le Duc (UR 8th), 2007 Thisthatandtother (PU 30th), 2011 Santa’s Son (PU 16th).
October was not my month. November, on the other hand, is! I cannot tell you how wonderful it was to wake up on Monday knowing it was November 1st. I was relieved and ready for some change. I know it seems odd that I would be that anxious to change months, but its made the biggest difference! My attitude is different and things are going much more smoothly. Granted, it is only the first week of November but I have a wonderful feeling about this month!
And finally, I ended the day with OSLO, AUGUST 31. Early in the film, Anders (Anders Danielsen Lie) weights his jacket down with stones and jumps into the water, hoping to drown himself. As it is, he just loses his jacket, but this half-comic suicide attempt will hang tensely over the entire movie. Anders is a recovering drug addict. He's been doing well in rehab, hasn't even had a beer in 10 months. And he's a smart guy, from an intellectual family and was doing well until he fucked up. He now has a one day leave from rehab, and he returns to Oslo to catch up with old friends. He's depressed about being a 30-something failure and jealous of his friends' seemingly more accomplished lives. He also feels guilt that his parents are selling their house (they claim they want a smaller place in retirement, he knows they went into debt putting him through rehab.) And, of course, he talks way too much about suicide (and how if he makes it look like and overdose no one will really be surprised or care that much.) It's an interesting and tense character study, and as a day with glimpses of hope (a job interview seemingly goes well, but he walks out after the interview gets too tense) becomes a night where everyone else is partying and it appears the temptation and despair might just be too much.
In 1870 railroad mogul Doyle Kerrigan and Widow Ida Throckmorten’s ward Margaret Hamilton are engaged. Doyle’s partner Tait Rylander regrets not courting Margaret first as he is attracted to her. Margaret intercedes when she sees a man abusing a woman with a child. She also sees pedophile Horne who she knows from her Beale days; he is running for governor. Doyle says he will take care of the woman who accuses him of murdering her husband. Later she overhears servants talk that the mother and child were dumped in the East River. Margaret learns Doyle was a runner; an occupation that has destroyed many Irish lives including her family.
I found I did get creasing each time I used the shadows, but given the humidity and my insane sweatiness lately, that's happening with most eye looks I do, regardless of the products used.
F- If an actor is “attacked” with that state, it will never be effective. (0%)
Birds Eye C&W Varieties $0.50/2
Jape – Floating – The Monkeys in the Zoo have More Fun Than Me (2004)
Run a thin line of hot glue along the edge of a mirror's backside, then align it to the outside edge of your base mirror. You have to move fast because the glue dries quickly. If that happens, just peel it off and start again. Then hold the mirror in place for a few seconds until it sets. Repeat this for all four side mirrors, and add a little glue at the inside corner seams if you feel it needs more stability.
For me I find my writing is much more strongly affected by the emotions that music drives me towards rather than those upon which the musical choice was based. And while this may not affect my non-fiction writing (including this blog – although, yes, I am dancing right now in my recliner while writing this, because I am that awesome), it certainly influences my fictional writing, to the point that sometimes my story changes as a result. Suddenly a happy ending can turn into a bittersweet ending if I’m listening to, say, Pink Floyd, while The Beatles can bring a character out of the depths of despair, and The Flaming Lips can just send everything into chaos, and so on and so forth.
Warnings stern and plaintive
I’m sure that for many women these things are of interest and that’s their choice. But it’s the fact that so many publications, including so-called ‘newspapers’, continue to make the unreasonable assumption that ALL women are interested in this disposable subject matter and non-events that bothers me.
Machine ~ There But For The Grace Of God Go I ~ RCA ~ 1979
It’s available in 5 colours here – pink, fuchsia, red, coral and plum – all with long-lasting synonyms attached. I was instantly drawn to the pink and fuchsia, but I went for the pink as I have plenty of fuchsia already.
Marley: Yes! That chicken is American! Ha ha ha!
3. In a saute pan, saute the onions, and carrots in olive oil. Add more oil if the veggies should need it. Once the onions are transclucent remove from heat.
trying hard to be awake
i will add this card to these other challenges,
Which is more important, to accomplish a task successfully, or to realise it is inessential before you start?
father and exposed to war strategies and societal information no one can
Ok, funny into going on. James Franco is a lot more attractive than Alec Baldwin that's for sure.
What’s your style? Jenny started out hoping to play electric guitar, so she could pursue Rock music, but in a short time she fell in love with Acoustic guitar! She made the realization that with her softer-toned voice, acoustic just fit her better! It also allowed her to try and include elements of folk songs into her music. Jenny comments, “To sum it up, I am an acoustic folk singer songwriter.”
from the couch to a toy...
I’m knee deep in engagement decorations which explains my absence from my blog. So I thought I’d feature some of the designers, crafters and makers on madeit.com. This is the on line market place I joined a couple of months ago and I’m so glad I did. I’ve had more success in 3 short months on madeit than I have in 3 or 4 years on Artfire (still tossing up about closing my store there).
Penguin Island is a little eco-bird santuary island off the coast of Rockingham - a 5 minute ferry ride to be precise. There is a sand bar that connects the island to the Rockingham coastline and some stupid people do try to walk across when the tide is out.... however we value our lives and took the ferry! Even though the sand bar is closed to public access people still walk across it!!!
Through the windows-through doors-burst like a ruthless force,
FIRST THINGS FIRST – WOMEN’S BODY LANGUAGE / FACIAL EXPRESSIONS – KNOW IT!
The concealed treasure that history temporarily forgot is a three hour drive from the colonial town of Chachapoyas.
This burnt sienna impasto kneads itself into crevices
Is it so much to ask for??
A sharp knife is also required when cooking a pork belly. The key to crispy skin is to score it, a task that’s almost impossible with even the best of knives. (My mom’s Cutco’s fared miserably with this task.)
May 4 – The Rave (Milwaukee, WI) #
Add the milk, butter, salt, sugar, and flour, and beat until well blended and smooth. (Electric beaters do a nice job of this.) Cover the bowl with plastic wrap, and let it stand overnight at room temperature.
Yes, Arnie, we are rigidly wedded to such dogma as balanced budgets, living within your means, being friendly to businesses and jobs and prosperity, and not chasing every really stupid far-left idea that comes down the pike -- like gay marriage, global warming, laws enforcing transgender equality, what Sacto considers a proper diet, and what propaganda should be included in school textbooks. Really solving California's problems would include a major decrease in spending, reigning in the public sector unions who are strangling the state, lowering taxes and less red tape -- all of which you failed miserably to do.
I’ve also found that those that are new to eating a vegetarian diet or are simply just trying to eat less meat, tend to gravitate towards highly-processed products like Morningstar Farms, because they look familiar and aren’t as foreign as tofu, tempeh, and seitan. But, I’m not a big advocate of eating anything processed by someone else other than me, so I don’t eat a lot of the processed fake meats. Yes, tofu, tempeh and seitan are processed, but not nearly as much as frozen veggie burgers, so I’ll primarily feature these 3 meat substitutes in my recipes; I think that’s what most newcomers to vegetarian eating need the most. So check back over the course of the month and I’ll hope you join me in celebrating Vegetarian Awareness Month and perhaps even consider adopting the lifestyle or cut back on how much meat you do eat.
The Government needs to create a Business Friendly enviorment!
(Of course, junk mail is disposed of immediately, as well.)
reclining lovers
Surprised and ashamed that she had lost her father’s gift, the princess ran back home. As she ran her breath escaped in labored puffs, her heart pushing against the space in which it slept. Tree roots reached out, curling oddly and tripping the small feet that pounded against the earth. Small shrubs scratched at the princess’s ankles, nipping at the heels of her feet. She shoved through the tall bamboo shoots that separated the fields from her home and fled past her sister sitting silently in the garden, heading to the prayer temple. Upon her arrival, she noticed the hunched figure of her mother on her knees, trembling, her hands clasped in front of her.
the steward's hand. He pulled her from the chair. Snatching her bonnet, she pressed it on her head, fighting to get it over her loose, rebellious chignon. Forfeiting, she flopped the bonnet on the chair and concentrated on her hair. Once satisfied with the way it lay, she bent to retrieve her bag. A shock of blond curls escaped, tumbled into her face. She battled to right it in a dignified manner and realized she had an audience. At the far end of the room, a man with a full beard and hat low on his head, watched with interest.
Spread carefully to edges of brownie.
Now I can write in specific post information for each day of the week, and "Pre-Plan" things out a bit! LOVE THAT! Love that it's all in one place! Love that I finally got another little area of my life organized! Love that things are going to get easier for me now that I got my act together!
Which is what is
According to the complaint, the FBI informant recorded numerous conversations with Wright in which he discussed the need to obtain explosive devices or make them using the book “The Anarchist Cookbook.”
Again, in hindsight probably not the best thing to say since one, he wants me to hit him and two, he would probably hit me back, but it was a text, so I felt safe talking a little smack. He just laughed and mocked me. He said, "Why, you know you are standing there with your feet crossed or standing like a flamingo." That was followed by "Being annoyed is good." "Hitting is better."
juice of half a lime
The other issue is traffic. When I get an intern from SDSU or "down south," as we say here in San Diego, she often don't realize what commuting during rush hour will do to her day. Add on the cost of gas in this day and age and the fact that most interns aren't driving a Nissan Leaf, and you get an even greater burden.
★ 12月30日 Awoi Instore at Zeal Link Shibuya (Open: 11:30, Start: 12:00)
All the time he’d been sitting there he wasn’t so much interested in watching me but he was counting the number of glasses I had consumed!!
Though I wouldn't stay too long. I'm kind of a fan on indoor plumbing and my iPod.
For freedom
OK, new arsehole coming. It is completely beyond me what the pull is to her vacuous, narcissistic, rude and abusive tripe.
Today I was at my local shops and popped into the local Chinese grocery. I love it there because it has different foods and lots of things we use day to day like vermicelli noodles, 2 minute noodles, Asian sauces and even some sweet treats at great prices.
Guest DJ Justin Zilman (OC)
Esteemed Irish playwright Brendan Behan once described himself as not a writer with a drinking problem but a drinker with a writing problem.
MAY (2002)
There’s more information about engagement, advocacy, and evangelism in the sections Engage Your Community, Find and Create Online Evangelists, and Create Buzz.
we figured she may have a good chance of making it through to the second round, where the top five applicants would get to continue the process of being trained as animators.
Saying so, she sticks some kleenex into his nose with her index finger, which makes him fall on his back.
32) Le Calandre (Rubano, Italy)
Hi! Happy Monday to you!!! Sandra here to share my final projects as a designer for Creative Charms :o(. This has been a blast and a great experience for me. Special thanks goes out to Midori, our dynamite Creative Charms Design Team Coordinator for all of the help and encouragement. Everyone that I have worked with on the Creative Charms design team has been fantastic and are wonderfully talented ladies. Thanks to all of you and to all of you followers for your kind words and support! As for the Creative Charms product - I have loved everything that I have had the opportunity to work with and I know that I will continue to purchase Creative Charms products for my projects!
2 pounds hot bulk sausage (mild can be used) (I used Jimmy Dean Reduced Fat and didn't need to drain it)
I used the manifesto from Shimelle as she always puts thing so well but I added the tag for my own journalling too. I'm thinking that there will be a lot of pockets for journalling this year! I basically wrote a note to myself about not stressing over the little things that are only important to ME. I get grumpy trying to do everything the way I want it but failing which then impacts on other people. I need to plan my time wisely and remember why I'm trying to do all this - its to make people happy after all! I still need to add my tiny numbers onto the tree but I can't lay my hands on the sticker sheet right now - typical! I added one of the rosette embellishments that I pre-made and added the Joy charm as it sums up, for me, what the whole season should be about.
We were right on time for our 1:00 tour, and after two superbly fresh glasses of Steam and a short pleasant visit with Fritz Maytag, walked into the brewhouse, where a batch of 2007 Christmas Ale was in the mash tun (and right up to the brim of the mash tun, too). We checked out the shallow lager/steam tanks (where we were told that only the Steam was brewed with a lager yeast; all the other beers were done with the same ale yeast), the open ale ferment tanks, the big closed tanks used for conditioning, and then to the bottling line, where I found this six-pack of just-packed 2007 Christmas Ale (sorry: didn't get a taste, it was embargoed until Nov. 5).
In my 20s, I loved going to the gym and doing froup exercise classes- loved Step!! But did it for myself. I started running in college- but on my gym's treadmill. Such a shame, never ran while I lived on campus. I did run planty of times off campus, miss all those trails!
SPREAD THE WORD!!
Big Top Rock at Teatro ZinZanni is the perfect venue for the bands of Seattle’s Kindiependent music collective, and the sold-out Oct. 8 show with Johnny Bregar & the Country Dawgs and Recess Monkey was a thoroughly captivating trifecta of fun. There are two more shows in the series, coming up on Oct. 15 (Caspar Babypants and The Harmonica Pocket) and Oct. 22 (The Not-Its! and The Board of Education), and I highly recommend you check them out. Underscore highly.
The number we waited for, strived for, prayed to get to. Don't know what to do with now that we are here.
Now I may be old fashioned but these “tools” (even the word “tools” sends shivers up my spine), to me, sound like what used to be called living, relating, or the decisions that generally just fall into the category of being a human being. Maybe the technical language might be “common sense.” I wondered, do we really need a power point presentation from a mommy blogger/expert to tell us to call our children when they are free to come to the phone?
I left all of my electronics behind.
8. Like a Hurricane – 8:20
and then I was going to bring my strawberries home and start making Strawberry Vanilla Jam and I was going to take pictures while I made the jam and then I would have posted those. Here is an older posts of my watermelon pickles.
CCP has a Dev Blog post up today that details what was going on behind the scenes for the Burn Jita event this past weekend. It is a worthwhile post and you should read it if you are at all interested in the game.
And I follow Him.
I will even go so far as to say that I almost stopped watching this movie about fifteen or twenty minutes in. The lead female character Ally (Anna Faris) reads a magazine article that says the average woman has slept with (insert any number here). In a moment of boredom, Ally makes a list of all the men she's slept with in her short single life and is shocked when that number is so much higher than the magazine article states is normal.
9:00 – The Office (NBC): Andy gears up for his comeback at Dunder Mifflin. Meanwhile, a boozy Robert California closes a nearby branch, creating a turf war when Jim and Dwight are pitted against another salesman. I don’t know how much longer I can watch Andy spin his sad little wheels.
While her best list grew, I had to laugh silently, because my best list looks like this: living room furniture, dining room table and chairs, back deck... And I'm quite certain my list was a direct revelation from God! ;-)
She's not gonna let me down
*What I miss: Still missing exercising, but also missing be able to go and do whatever I want. I still have to take it easy, and that's not easy for me.
Rooted to the spot, Kayla looked at her and then Kenneth. Then she broke out in laughter. But it wasn’t one of relief or understanding.
God reminded me that I had a goal and that I should stay focused on that goal. He also reminded me that in having any type of business, I would have to deal with people, and I still had to stay focused on my goal. Like the prophet Nehemiah, I have to build up my business like he built the walls around Jerusalem, not letting things or people distract me. This means staying focused on the Word of God and His instructions, fortifying myself in Him, and trusting that He will provide all that is needed. In fortifying myself, I must remain steadfast in my work for the Lord and know that God is my source. I must be sober and alert lest the adversary try to spoil my work, and remain watchful so that the influence of things and people do not discourage me from doing a good work. Finally, I must never let my guard down, because things and people are unpredictable.
I also have been very sick for 3 weeks with Gastritis and GERD so that has not been very fun, hopefully it fixes itself soon! We also have some other fun news to share but I will share that next time, it deserves a post by itself!
#RonPaul2012
Now, onto panicking about the financing and closing of two homes on the same day...oh yeah, and moving...UGH!
The Diocese of Würburg, Germany will permanently display a portrayal of the Last Supper by Henning von Glerken in its Cathedral Museum. This contemporary homage to Da Vinci’s Last Supper depicts six women and two children among the dozen apostles. Three adults and all the children are completely naked and one figure has a bare torso. The place for the Savior is not shown, but when visitors sit on a bench, their face is projected on the wall in the place of the Christ.
Yep. To the mother in law. As if it wasn't bad enough that we'd only met four times and here I was living in her house, practically engaged to her son... I had to go rub our sex life in her face before she'd even had time to wake up.
Dr. King's birthday offers an opportunity to write about the why. We were in Montgomery on a segregated bus the same year that Rosa Parks refused to relinquish her seat, and because of King's actions, our lives, and many others, have been transformed.
When you spend as much time at skate parks as I have especially ones filled with more little kids than skilled skaters, you get used to answering the same questions over and over again.
"Sexual commodification is an important part of high fashion today." Elizabeth Semmelhack
A public playground and park is next door on Washington Street and Lafayette, called Underwood Park, named for the typewriter mogul, John Thomas Underwood (1857-1937), whose mansion once stood on this property.
What you do is, you give me a compensation for my time involved."
“Why give me hope – Then give me up – Just to be the death of me – Save the rest of me” – That was my fear once the weekend was over. I was afraid that I was going to have this fabulous weekend with him where my life felt perfect but something was going to interfere. I kept expecting a hiccup in my plans and dreams. I was afraid one night I was going to talk to him and he was going to change our plans and end things before they had truly been able to happen. It would have been devastating, it would have been the death of me, but it wasn’t. It wasn’t because he believed in us the same way I believed in us and two weeks after our weekend I returned to Alabama and we started the rest of our lives together. This song though, it makes me think about how devastating my life would have been if either of us had hesitated and not seen this through. My husband is the love of my life. It’s an obsessive love. It’s a strong, devoted, committed love and it’s beautiful and it’s exciting and it’s forever.
This is one of my favorite ways of bringing in money. Why? Because I LOVE teaching and this way I get to do both: stay-at-home and teach. I find jobs many different ways. I have posted some on job boards. You can also use craigslist. I have recently found Care.com. You can post your own ad and people can find you, or you can find people who have listed what they need.
Hope everybody had fun trying to incorporate the ABCs into poems.
“We are going to pay a very heavy price for the fact there has been a catalogue of neglect by the former Government which has focused on renewable energy sources,” Mr Birkett said.
Last words of Nurse Edith Cavell, shot before a firing squad, October 1915
for my trials;
Heres the long story...
Photo by Tara Graeber
Wow, I adore that she was also planning ahead, leaving a space for future expansion and a TV. Knowing where she wants the room to evolve to when creating it is such a great thing!
An early example of the state oppressing its own people and privileging foreigners was the judgements on the race battle in Notting Hill of 1958. Evil Judge Salmon gave excessive sentences of around 4 years to the young working-class lads but excused the Blacks.
Close to the end of Marwenecol, after receiving enough encouragement, when the artist finally wears a pair of his women's shoes to his gallery show - I cried. Even more than what this indicated about his own healing process, I was emotionally overtain by the moment as a political act. As for his own healing process, the film-maker saves the best for last. In a meta-statement that would make the director of Sherlock Jr. proud, we are shown the dolls of the dolls. We see Hogancamp manipulating the now big doll of himself, manipulating the new little doll of himself, being filmed in a documentary about the referent of the referent that is the actual man. You'd think that artifice upon artifice would constitute a further retreat from reality. But dialectically, the exact opposite is happening. Not as some ironic twist either. By allowing his emerging post-trauma experience into his pretend kingdom, the man is reconstituting his self-consciousness, reclaiming the dignity of his whole mind, recovering his soul. This is incontrovertibly confirmed we we see him bringing in to the picture his post-post-trauma experience.
The move of the Australian Labor Party to the centre, and its embrace of neoliberal economics, has therefore come at a certain price for the party, even if those changes were largely inevitable as society evolved further and further away from the post-Industrial Revolution shape that it had during the 19th Century when the Labor Party was first established. A lot, if not most, Australian voters now see the Labor and the Coalition (Liberal/National) alternatives not as being radically different, but as being two versions of the same thing, and they are easily interchangeable.
1. Warm up for eight minutes. You can do whatever you like to get your heart rate up. Do some jumping jacks, jog in place or dance to your favorite song.
Dr. Hall said that Olivia is definitely "special." She said that she presents characteristics of CP and AMC, but not either by classic definition. Adding in low-functioning autism and a ton of "normal" test results, and she is indeed a mystery. She wants to be sure that the geneticists have tested for Rett's Syndrome, as she felt that Olivia had a lot of characteristics that match that disorder. We told her that we were fairly certain that genetics had tested for that already, and she said she would contact them to be sure.
Silvia and I best friends for ever! She has more friends than anybody I know.
by Susanna Reich (Author) and Amy Bates (Illustrator)
Samson manages to be a likable narrator despite being a drug dealer and owning a pawn shop where he pays desperate people practically nothing for their most valuable items.
4) Butter both sides of the bread and toast it on the stove.
UNDEAD CREEP started as a project and then turned it into a real band.
Unfortunately, the agreement is silent on how the existing deployment model should be improved.
The new songs have a big, modern polished sound, but with that warm, fuzzy, hard-hitting Rick Rubin feel to them. Linkin Park has evolved from MTV frat-house faves into a class act and MC Mike Shinoda makes that clear in the rap-heavy joint “Until It Breaks” off Living Things. Over a bed of big healthy drums, he confidently spits, “I’m a Banksy / You’re a Brainwash / Get the picture like that?” Yes, we get the picture.
He continues to show me words…though they’re all wrong and he seems to spend more time correcting them than anything else.
The term Fascism was first used by the totalitarian right-wingnationalist regime of Mussolini in Italy (1922–43), and the regimes of the Nazis in Germany and Franco in Spain were also fascist.
My parents also gave me a gift card to Macy's, and a really lovely birthday card. It's too long to type out here on the blog, but I will reread the card many times in the coming weeks. Just like Roll Away Your Stone, it speaks to this period of my life. Mom picked out the card herself-- she knows me really well.
Add- ons:
Once the term is finished, I'll post a reflection on how it all went. At the moment, I'm as excited as I've ever been for a new term, because I put an awful lot of work into preparing these courses and each one is about a subject I'm really passionate about. With luck, that passion won't reduce me to standing in front of the class each day and saying, "Isn't that just, like, so coool!"
"You're a cynic."
The perfect first course for a cool brisk autumn day is this golden savory
Matthew 3:13-14
Glock will be hoping for a dry track to successfully complete the tests the Marussia require.
I was glad to get home.
“Yes.” I say, fighting to keep my voice even.
Let’s start with this statement from Dr JP Dadhich, National Coordinator, Breastfeeding Promotion Network of India, “Breastfeeding plays a key role not only in infancy but also in shaping the future of the child. Exposure to infant formula during this vital period may in fact increase chances of obesity later in childhood. The risk increases as the beneficial effects of breastmilk that prevent obesity are replaced with the detrimental effects of infant formula.”
Thank you, God, for Nate. And for perspective.
She was much worse than this though, and actually used to run away every time she saw the brush. To encourage her, I gave her some cuddles first and then showed her the brush. I kept doing this, and at the same time as stroking her, I brushed. I was extra careful because she was still a baby! I used, and still use, a kitten grooming set.
Gina Bloom — Associate Professor and Director of Graduate Studies, English, Co-Director of the Mellon Research Initiative in Early Modern Studies
Roger Carey, who represented Lis for many years, said, "She was not just a client, but a dear friend. She was so positive about life and her natural energy was intoxicating. She couldn't believe her luck when her career was resurrected in her own series."
EDIT: Its been brought to my attention that I didn’t mention my substitute for the vegetable shortenings and oils in this recipe. The edits have been made above !10/22/11
I read my news online now.
Congratulations to all of our winners, our Top 3 Badge can be found on the tab above called "Winner/Top 3 Banners" other wise all of our prizes can be claimed by emailing me at Inky.Impressions@hotmail.com!
Le Batard: ”But Chal, pal, your team had a 26-game winning streak this year, the nation’s longest, and…”
A. Regarding the term “ban”
When Tsar Saltan heard this, again was he seized with a desire to see the island, but, as before, his evil wife and her sister sneered and the wife said:
Killing machines a case in point:
Kedah Barisan Nasional (BN) has lost a chance to shake the PAS-led Pakatan Rakyat state government when it did not “exploit” the recent crisis in the state administration. Political observers said the internal conflict in Kedah PAS had split the party and made it “vulnerable” to outside attacks but BN did not seize the opportunity, thus making it difficult for BN to retake the state.
If anyone would like to help me with this endeavour it would be truly appreciated.
Suddenly I felt eerily tired and could hardly bear all these people around me, a side effect commonly experienced after having spend time in self-imposed isolation.
So... gasp... I RE-USED A PREVIOUS COSTUME. But I did re-vamp it. The first iteration, thrown together last-minute back in my grad school years, had sparser leaves, only safety-pinned in place. So, hours before I was to leave for the ballroom party, I jogged over to Kmart and picked up another bag of fake autumn leaves (it's ridiculously easy to find fake autumn leaves in October), and I stitched them all in place so they wouldn't get mussed when I danced. The garments to which the leaves are attached are four pieces (skirt, tunic, Turkish bodice, and scarf) that I acquired during one of the summers when I worked as a sales wench at the booth of delightful designer (and all-around kind and beloved gentleman) Steven Overstreet, at the Southern California Renaissance Faire. Those were good times, they were.
The longest book content wise was Catcher in the Rye by J. D. Salinger. I do feel like I’m going to offend a lot of people but this is on my list of books i really dislike! Although its not a very long book, it felt like it while i was reading it!
Now all I need to do is figure out how to get my background (hand stitched and beaded silk fusion) to extend all the way down the sides instead of just at the top of the page. Sigh..
Cover your kitchen cabinet shelves with foil. The foil attracts the electricity and it won’t go toward you. It’s picked up by foil.
If two input square sentences are matched, and the three input values of each sentence match, the reasoning between the two sentences is the same; square, triangle, circle.
frame and painted it pink using a soy based paint. It took about 4 coats since the frame originally was black.
Hol
Hong Kong Mercantile Exchange Starts Gold Futures Trading. Silver Futures Soon! Alfred Adask: “The Big Legal Secret, The Government Thinks We Are Animals”! Brother Nathanael: AIPAC’S Prelude To Treason 2011 ! David Duke: Wicked Witch Osama and Wizard Obama! Zionist Mass Murderers And War Lies! Ron Paul Questions Official Bin Laden Story: “I’ve Heard So Many Stories”! Jeff Clark: “Silver Price – The Least You Should Worry About”! World on Course For Next Crisis, Warns Freemason Gordon Brown!
The hoops are rather large but not heavy at all! The bracelets are very comfy as well! The earrings were $7 a piece and the bracelets were $5 a piece!
Mandy from Biblical Homemaking is part of a Spring Cleaning Challenge. Just in time to inspire me to complete mine! Here are some of the posts that have inspired me from this link party. (Too bad I can't win the giveaway)
One of the many tricks to self control in the culinary program is bringing gum. Yes, I bring my Trident White gum every time I attend class so I don’t overindulge myself. I try the many creations in class but I watch the portions being I’m trying to maintain my current goals for the year which will be in upcoming blog. A true chef will try all of his artwork. One should always carry passion and depth in their work. Being, I’m a perfectionist every product must come out looking and tasting like the Mona Lisa. I take this profession seriously and want to excel to the very top. Big World here I come! Enjoy the pictures:)
Everything about them. Sitting on the edge of the sidewalk till your butt is numb, or being smart enough to drag a lawn chair out there with you, because standing up for an hour seems so overrated. Even though loads of people are walking for miles for your entertainment.
tight body
“Let me sleep on it,” Hood said finally.
Further, I have lost the need to control. For one thing it is tiring to try to control other people. As a teacher, I tend to do that a lot. So, when I see that I am about to go into the 20th lecture about the exact same thing to a student, I have let go understanding that this student knows how the rules of my class works and what will happen. I just let life take place and let go. I am thankful for letting go of this. That doesn’t mean that the students run wild. I just do what is in my power to do. If they don’t turn in an assignment, I explain the consequences, and let them know that I will adhere to them. I am so thankful for this because this brings more of a piece of mind on a regular basis.
So if a customer ever complained about there not being enough alcohol in their drink, I'd snatch the drink right out of their hands and look them dead in the eye as I poured their drink down the sink. I would then grab the glass, set it on the bar and have the customer watch me remake their drink using the jigger. I'd inform them that it was the club's rules that every drink have a specific measure of alcohol in them. If they had problems tasting the alcohol, they could either order a double and pay for a double or drink somewhere else.
Howard's sister told us he was so proud of his quilt he asked caregivers at his retirement center to hang it on the wall for all to enjoy.
Hines’ arrest report said an argument between the groups involved the younger golfers driving, drinking and “malingering” on the greens.
I hoard canned pumpkin. I'm probably the reason that there is a "supposed" pumpkin shortage. I eat pumpkin year-round. Here's one cup. Isn't uncooked pumpkin a pretty color? Remember this, as I'll point this out later on.
Herein lies the unteachable magic – feeling & vision
This issue is supposed to be highlighted long time ago, if I can recall it was before Eidul Fitr last year (2009) because I still remember I have voiced it out radically during discussion among my family members. But, what saddened me and of course a shame to lots of people when nobody is eager to talk about this issue especially the opposition leaders. Why? Don’t they are the one who are extremely fighting against corruption? Or do they think if this is related to their colleague, they are not suppose to comment?
Your experience led me to think of something I read quite a while ago.
Who’s mouth fell so displaced
By the way, I am re-reading Pollyanna, the novel. I will, of course, work on a structured, somewhat intelligent book review when I am finished but only after I write the other one that I was intending to write first. I have a beautiful new writing tool that I am obsessing over because it might reign over the chaos that is the screenplay. Oh my goodness, I am totally in love with a computer program! I feel I have awakened a sleeping giant. The screenplay has gotten so fat and chunky over this last year, I think it is about to spring up and leap away! Again, the beauty of potential!
Earlier this year Masing spoke of his determination to ‘alienate’ double the number of native customary lands from 1 million hectares to 2 million hectares over the coming few years.
Like Martin’s scheme, the devil is in the details of our ABO plan. For many of us, it’ll require re-joining a discredited party we left in disgust. However emotionally or ethically unsettling, it’s physically easy.
About 40 shutter clicks later, I captured this beauty using the natural light as it filtered into the window:
Aaron came and visited us since we were kind of home-bound with the two.....especially with Ethan, the trouble maker :) The cutest trouble maker you ever did see, of course!!! Binky only for bedtime? Not so much.... oops!!! He is scootin around getting into everything and totally wants to do everything on his own, but my favorite thing about him is that he will totally sit and cuddle with you while you watch a movie. He loves movies and always falls asleep in our arms. When I came home from the grocery store, I walked into the bedroom to see him and Austin snuggling. Ethan had the remote in one hand and chocolate licorice in the other while watching the Jepsons. So Austin....so cute!
But that doesn't stop me from yearning for their return. You see, I may be from Detroit but my paternal grandmother was raised in Brooklyn. I vaguely remember the stories she would tell me as a very young boy. They may not have been on top during her time in this borough. (Ironically, she beat the team in moving to la-la land by a decade.) I do remember the passion she had in describing the team.
#4 is actually based mostly in reality, because we do not have a lot of disposable income. But it came down to this… Should I feel guilty all the time over not taking care of the house (which I did), or should I find a solution (which I did)? Learning what I have the capacity for and what to let go of will be a lifelong process, but something had to give NOW.
• The first and most important thing to remember about pet stains is to do something about them immediately. The longer you wait to clean the spot, the more it can stain/ the worse it will smell.
$1520 ÷ 14 days (approximately) = $108 to save each day
05 - Stone In Your Heart 04:16
THE LINK:
Outstanding trait: Courage and doubt
Experiment with your vinaigrette ingredients. If too tangy, you can add a pinch of sweet. Start with a little less tang and add more. Remember, it should have a little zip before you toss it with your veggie/salad. Try the recipe once with lemon juice and the next time with your favorite white vinegar.
I knew almost nothing about Narciso Ibáñez Serrador's 1976 movie ¿Quién puede matar a un niño? except that it was a horror movie, and I figured a horror movie with a title like that ought to at least be interesting. And it is that.
whao I rarely get excited when I see a new lookbook (maybe it's cause I'm always so busy or maybe I'm just a big a-hole) but when I saw this on BecauseImAddicted I had an instant urge to repost this GOOD ASS styling....
According to a recent report by the Congressional Budget Office, rising income inequality is a long-term trend that began in the late 1970s and strengthened during the last two decades. The report confirms the protesters’ belief that the rising gap between the income of the top 1 percent and the income of everyone else is a major factor behind escalating inequality.
2tbsp syrup
“Here,” he offered his wounded companion a military compress, “put pressure on it with this. I’m going to try to take this guy out.”
It's Friday! And it is raining. booo..... We're due, I suppose. Sunny and glorious and hovering near 40 is just not gonna last forever here in the Midwest. We enjoyed it immensely while it lasted, though.
This is a woman who just wants to be able to resist that controlling male domination, to assert her own rights and her own individuality. An important thread that winds through several of these conversations is the concept of owning one's self. The driver does not want to "belong" to a man or anyone else, and she doesn't want to feel like she belongs to her son either, like she has to foresake everything she wants to do in order to care for her family. The woman is based on Akbari's own character, and like the actress playing her, she's a creative person, a photographer and painter who travels and works a lot and thus can't always spend time with her family. Her son obviously resents her for this, and despite her attempts to explain her decisions, he remains convinced that she is simply selfish for wanting something for herself, for wanting a life beyond the home, beyond childcare and domestic chores. There are several conversations with Amin spaced out throughout the film, and in the later ones, after he has moved in with his father, he seems slightly more relaxed, less prone to anger, but sadly no more accepting of his mother's life and desire for self-definition.
In order for me to give it the look I was looking for, I began by sanding it. Then I decided to try to spray paint it. This was the first time that I had ever tried spray paint. This is the Spray Paint that I tried from Home Hardware (Canada)
37. When you hear the sound of the crowd cheering, “Spartacus! Spartacus!” in the movie Spartacus, it was actually a pre-taped recording from a 1959 football game at Michigan State University’s Spartan Stadium.
Throughout the decades of the nineteen-seventies, eighties and nineties the South African Reserve Bank followed a policy of high interest rates in order to limit consumer spending and inflation. During the nineties foreign exchange restrictions were lifted and the country was exposed to the process of economic globalisation. Under these circumstances interest rate has had to serve the additional role of attracting speculative money flows from overseas in order to maintain the balance of payments - and this while savings and long-term investments of local people and organisations was flooding out of the country! The decision to lift foreign exchange restrictions has had a disastrous effect on the impoverishment of the nation. High interest rates have had to serve as the all purpose 'hammer' for managing economic and monetary policy.
3. Downside Up 6:27
I was absolutely stunned by this revelation and yes ... it made me cry even more. I'm pretty certain I will not be returning to that particular McDonalds any time in the near future.
implements unless you count when Season refers to an item as "That damn hairbrush!" or "The effin' paddle!" Only kidding about the cussing. :-)
She pulled him down for another long, slow kiss on the mouth. “Don’t be late.”
And notice what happened when our Lord healed the man with leprosy:
CALL 1-800-SKY-DIVE
Patty wanted me to come to her house for lunch and upon arriving our first order of business was a nice cool glass of Chardonnay....first order of relaxing that is! Oh, did I mention Patty has a beautiful house on the lake with gorgeous view? You'll see that in a minute...right now let me tell you about the delicious lunch she had prepared...Chilled Blueberry Soup that could have been a dessert...so cool and refreshing...and my favorite, Curried Chicken Salad and croissants! It was all so delicious!! After the Chardonnay and that delicious lunch I was prepared for a nap, but no....Patty said, "Let do a peppermint foot soak!!" Sounds good to me...first I'm relaxed with the wine...got a full tummy from lunch... and now we're going to soak our feet in a something that smelled so good I wanted to drink it!!! I will definitely be purchasing some of Dr. Teal's Peppermint Foot Soak tomorrow! This stuff smells sooo good and makes your feet feel wonderful! So, here we were, sitting on her screened porch, soaking our feet, overlooking her gorgeous pool and lake view and then...here she comes with one more thing for relaxing...like I'm not already on the verge of snoring....an Apricot Brandy Slush....sssslllllluuurrrrppp! So delish, I wanted to just gulp that thing down but knew better! You have got to make up a batch of these to keep in your freezer. The perfect frozen drink for a hot summer day, especially here in South Carolina where it topped 100 today! I'll share the recipe at the end of this post, but I just have to say my day was perfect. Just what the doctor ordered...I was totally relaxed enjoying the time I got to spend with my special friend, catching up on our families, our lives, and just girl talk! You know Patty and I can go for months without seeing one another and we live really close. We'll shoot each other an email here and there...maybe a quick phone call...but we are always connected in our hearts. We were trying to figure out when we saw each other last and figured out .it was when we exchanged our Christmas presents sometime in January! We had sooo much to catch up on, it was nice relaxing on her porch, soaking my feet, sipping an Apricot Brandy Slushy, chatting with my dear, dear friend.....thank you Patty, it was a perfect day! xxoo
In the bowl of a stand mixer, cream the butter and sugar together at medium speed until light and fluffy. Add the eggs, one at a time, beating until each is incorporated. Add the vanilla extract and sour cream and beat at low speed until combined.
Unlike some firms, Heinze does not charge his clients for the monitoring services. "I'm willing to do this free educational work if it brings the client up to speed and lets me provide a better service," he says.
A engagement photo to come but here is one I had on hand of the cute couple.
Crystal Lacquer
03 Meat
5. Alex Shaffer, Win Win – I’m sure there will be some people who see the movie and disagree with me on this one. It’s a very minimalist performance, but he’s a teenager. He’s a teenager from a troubled home too, but he doesn’t play that like the “angry young man” archetype that movies have run into the ground. It’s a naturalistic performance. Maybe Alex Shaffer (who was a wrestler before he started acting with this movie) only has this one great performance in him, but it’s enough.
Monday was more fun times. Saylee had a birthday party and Madi got to go to a friends. Cole and John played Big Game Hunter 2012 while Roo took a nap. Later we went to the mall to maybe go to a movie, but we decided to wait til there was one we really wanted to see. The kids played at the playground and got some energy out. Then home for calzones, and we rented 'Mr Popper's Penguins' which they thought was quite funny. Off to their own beds and time for normal routine. It was a great weekend!
It has been a very busy couple of days. Since I've last posted, we've gone to the Queen's Creek Olive Mill, I've visited the pool and read, went shopping to Target (I love Target), hiked Camelback Mountain and relaxed. What have you been doing on your Spring Break boys and girls?
13. My husband is my boyfriend. :) In the show and in life. Isn't that nice?
But the last 15 years have brought a definite change to the reviewing landscape. First are the reviews on Amazon and Barnesandnoble.com. They aren’t reviews so much as they are opinions. I don’t give them much thought since anyone with a screen name and a password can leave a comment. I find they often leave negative feedback. I assume this is because they have nothing better to do with their time. I’ve been reading for eons and I’ve never once trashed a book or an author. And I’ve read some stuff I didn’t care for. Why? Because I’m not an authority. I’m not a journalist trained to write an objective piece about a work of fiction or non-fiction. I will go in and praise a book. But that’s all I’m bringing to the table. My opinion.
Afterwards the nightlife gets livelier throughout the city’s many Irish bars and pubs, as the celebration draws thousands of people from all over the state.
Southland 5.1% to 4.2% (3,000 to 2,700)
Instead they are amazingly highly detailed pencil drawings, the work of Scottish artist Paul Cadden.
I have gotten free things from offers. I have a free TV in my family room right now that came from a free offer. I have a wonderful picnic set and a clock, several T shirts, baseball caps, headphones, an MP3 player and other items that have come from free offers. I know that they are real, and I know that you can find lots of these, but you need to be a detective and search out the good ones.
Inevitable wandering, people come and go
To face the mighty unknown sea of death.
Metropolitan Hilarion Kapral of New York and Eastern America, the First Hierarch of the ROCOR, in his general letter on canonisation, said, “Through his selfless life, podvig, and martyric death, Alexander Schmorell witnessed his love for God and His Image, reflected in his neighbour”. Vladyki Hilarion pointed up that New Martyr Alexander had the opportunity to avoid punishment and save his life, but he voluntarily embraced suffering, overcoming his own egotism, which “desires that we all depart from God, from Divine love”. Metropolitan Hilarion said he hoped that from now glorified in the saints, Alexander Schmorell would “be the intercessor of our spiritual correction, of the renewal of our lives and our internal powers”.
I shall immediately start with pointing out that I’m not a believer in horoscopes or star signs, but if you stick with me you’ll see where I’m going. Don’t worry, it’s not a long piece.
Are you wondering if I used my power tools for this project? I have to come clean and tell you I didn't touch a single one. I played the role of Tim the Toolman's handy assistant and let my husband do the cutting. I bet he just cringes inside when he hears the words..."So, I was thinking..."
Mexico? Forget it. Drink anything that doesn’t come out of a bottle there and Senor Montezuma will find his way into your intestinal tract and the rest of your vacation is then spent running from one outhouse to another. Indoor plumbing can be rare in Mexico and is often reserved only for drug cartel chieftains and Mexican federales, which often times can be one and the same.
I have a job interview tomorrow.
And from the outside
When we came together we got in groups and put our puppies in ABC order by their collars. The collars, sight words, and other ideas are all in the unit.
With the fictional "Tomania" and "Bacteria" standing in for Germany and Italy, respectively, The Great Dictator follows the dual lives of Tomania's maniacal dictator, Adenoid Hynkel (Charlie Chaplin), and a Jewish barber (Charlie Chaplin, again) living in a Tomanian (or should we say Tomaniac?) ghetto. Beginning in World War I, the unnamed barber - a bumbling klutz of a soldier - manages to save a Tomanian pilot, Schultz (Reginald Gardiner). After some clowning around and a plane crash, the barber suffers memory loss and spends most of the interwar period in a hospital. When he returns, he finds his neighborhood radically different: it's now a violent, volatile ghetto where stormtroopers regularly harass shopowners and families, threatening them with concentration camps.
Now that the arguments both for and against ObamaCare have been made, it is in the Supreme Court's hands. Going into the fight, the law's supporters were cocky and arrogant. Coming out the other side, it's a different story, to say the least (actually, the term "panic" seems to be the go-to phrase). While we wait for the Court to make it's decision, I'd like to see some ideas from Republicans about what to replace the law with in the event it is struck down.
- Access to multi-channel experience Know the market and your investments
and though time, too, runs out
From your neutrals you will also need a total of 180 x 3 inch squares.
Dead or Alive by Tom Clancy was the number one bestseller in hardback.
I highly suggest going to see it!
One red onion (quartered)
You are always speaking evil of your brother *
We also didn't have the money, really, to pay for it ... and feel good about it.
Randomized controlled studies have shown that as many as 50–90% of women can reduce or overcome SUI with Kegels alone. However, reports of effectiveness vary since many people do not receive proper Kegel instruction. Consistent use of vaginal cones can improve or cure incontinence within four to six weeks in 70% of women.
Dr. King knew all about the master’s tools, he had to confront them all the time, black people telling him to chill to shut up to quit making trouble for “the rest of us.” He also understood that a little threat was not a bad thing.The yin of Malcolm X to his yang of love and peace was a useful tool. A kind of ” see what you might get if you do not go along with what I am trying to do?”
The focus then switches to skills, with step-by-step instructions (all fully illustrated) on different techniques like sewing seams, adding zips and quilting. After each new skill is introduced, you get 1-3 simple projects to make to test out the technique (20 projects in total). Some of the projects have templates provided at the back of the book (most of which need enlarging by 300-400%) and the rest just require you to cut pieces of fabric to certain sizes.
requireshate: Aliette sez: “but really, when you’ve lived in a city your whole life, are you really going to pause and describe in minute detail every single fruit on the fruit-sellers’ stand?”
This has nothing to do with tongues or any supernatural physical phenomenon. We see this confirmed in Ephesians 2:18.
8. ? - Everybody Wants To Be Black on a Saturday Night
How would you feed yourself and your family?
In Lifeclass.”(1974) exhibits the disintegration of a man “Allat”, an instructor at an evening class who lost of belief in the value of what he is imparting:
Linda stirs beside me in the bed and takes a peek at the clock. I snuggle up behind her and put my arms around her.
Prayer: Father, in Jesus name, I thank you for delivering me today. I know you did not cause this trouble to happen to me. I believe Jesus is saving me, starting right now and I praise you for your glory transforming my life. Amen
A soldier, who is given an invisibility cloak, follows the sisters across a lake to a magic castle where the princesses dance all night long. He follows the girls for three nights, taking souvenirs from the Other Kingdom as proof for the king. He solves the mystery and marries the eldest daughter, becoming king himself.
And her family, don’t forget the family. There are some real peaches in Melissa’s family tree. I wouldn’t mind lobbing a few back at Mom and a certain sister-in-law.
in my Sunday best, you know... a nice skirt and sweater set.
Western herbal medicine recommends hawthorn (Crataegus laevigata or C. oxyacantha) to help prevent long-term angina, since this herb strengthens heart muscles’ ability to contract.
They will not accept a tip.. well, sometimes one will but it is rare.
This year Mother Nature gave him a lovely present.
Euphoria at getting a tax refund, which lasts until you realize that it was your money to start with.
And he asks you where you've been, you tell him who you've seen
Learning Resources announces the sponsorship of a teacher grant hosted by WeAreTeachers. To apply, teachers must answer this question: “How would you use portable interactive technology to create collaborative lessons?” After the application process concludes, educators can invite colleagues to vote for their favorite lesson ideas. Each of the three top vote getters will win a set of three now!Boards and three GeoSafari Tuff Cams, a prize package valued at $2,000. Additionally, two merit-based winners selected by a panel of teachers will each win one now!Board and one GeoSafari Tuff Cam, a total value of $700. Teachers can apply for the
Though our love story took many crazy paths before we married, we took that next step knowing we wanted to be with each other for the rest of our days. In the past seven years we've had two amazing daughters, a number of wild adventures, and more inside jokes than we can count.
spring! We're ready for you and your beautiful
3. Dunno - Have Nagila
Think that it's not an issue? I have never seen a three-digit number on the scale, and I've still heard the offhand comment from distant relatives and family members that I'm fat. "Mập mặt," or "Fat face" in English, they'll tell me and then squeeze my cheeks.
“Nothing is so fatiguing as the eternal hanging on of an uncompleted task.”
On 11 October 1492 the sailors sang the Salve on sighting land, thus bringing the patronage of the Immaculate Conception to our hemisphere. The ship that brought Columbus was Holy Mary of the Immaculate Conception. Spanish Catholics have had a clear and unrelenting devotion to the Immaculate Conception of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary for at least five hundred years.
I love you, Matsuka.
James Ellroy. Was that a trick question? This is another story we studied in college, after first analyzing the movie, the directing, the camera angles, and what made it so great. I not only bought the novel, but I had Santa bring me the screenplay and DVD. I was very impressed how the screenwriters were able to capture the essence of Ellroy’s work and condense it into a very tight screenplay. They should have won the Oscar that year, but I think it went to
He lives! All glory to his name!
Opt. tapestry needle for sewing button and weaving ends
But for those of us who know the Lord as personal Saviour we are free from sin because of the gift of God. “Sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under the law, but under grace.”
With that said, I will leave the blog-nation for now - I think this is going to be fun (and addictive).
Wore this outfit because I was anticipating it to be 65 degrees in Paris the other day, turns out weather.com lies and it only reached 60. Bummer. I'm so sick of rainy and grey weather, I'm ready to bust out some summer clothing, and not freeze my ass off whilst wearing it!
And the best part is that there are currently 81 releases. About every 3 months a new release is available so there is more variety. Instructors can stick to one release from start to finish, or pick tracks from different releases.
Please email me so I can get your details to our fab sponsors.
I had to take my wife’s car in today to get her oil changed and get her state inspection renewed. I am like George Costanza when it comes to cars. I know absolutely nothing about automotive technology and am thoroughly convinced that most mechanics know this fact and use my lack of a brain to try to rip me off.
To where the damned have howled away their hearts,
The perfect pumpkins would be on our front porch. Round, deep orange, corrugated evenly, and ready for carving. Decorating to complement the Fall mums blooming madly in terracotta pots, sentries at our doorway.
Dried prawns, 1 tablespoon, deep fried until crispy
You could confess Face to Face which was like sitting in a therapist’s office only the therapist was dressed like a priest, or you could go Screen style, which was deliciously creepy and made you feel like you were starring in a movie about an Italian crime family or a Mexican soap opera. When I was a kid, I did Face to Face. As I got older, Screen. Not that my sins got all that crazy as I got older, but I guess I’ve just always been a romantic.
Biking, because that’s my primary passion. And yoga. And knitting. And shopping. Pet peeves. Culture and travel. So the usual gamut of topics that may or may not interest readers. I’ve been told I have a strong, humorous voice, so hopefully that will appear here. Once I become more adept (believe me there’s a huge learning curve), I hope to post photos. So be patient, give me a chance, comment often.
Reliable as usual, with only one segment (albeit a really good one): Poehler comes back to the Update desk to not only do another installment of “Really!?! With Seth and Amy”, but also to present some of the top stories of the week. My only small criticism was with the joke about Shakira getting attacked by a sea lion (“The story has to be true…because it was reported by Shakira’s hips”). The audience got it, then Seth unnecessarily explained the joke.
I still looked 6 months pregnant........
These past few months have been ones of a bittersweet mingling of sorrow and joy. Sorrow at two heartbreaking personal losses, and joy in the delight of sharing my beloved grandchildren’s Christmas. I’ve been writing, but only in my hand-written journal; thoughts which perhaps are too dark, too close to the bone to share publicly. A thoughtful little note from another blogger has rekindled my desire to start blogging again, and I am thankful for his kindness.
Light. Pure, golden light penetrated through my eyelids. At first, there was wonder. Where had the light come from? Then shrieks and screams came from the dark ones around me. They were screaming a name! I couldn’t understand why they were so afraid. I could almost feel the delicious light as it poured over and around me. It brought a warmth to inner soul as nothing else ever had. With my eyes still closed, I listened as the shrieks and screams died away. I could sense that I was alone…except for the light. Slowly, ever so slowly, I opened my eyes for the second time that night and felt my breath catch in my throat. He was standing there. I recognized Him even though I had never seen Him before. Jesus…
Ice Cream Anything Ben & Jerry’s
ND - Well no, but that would have come in on the first day after the end of the season…
As part of the solution, Isabel de los Rios even have recipes for people to follow. It does not tell people to buy specialized diets instead she tells people to buy food and cook them right. And her recipes are safe for everyone too; even people with sensitive diets or pregnant mothers can dig in to her diet solution program.
Inks: Chocolate Chip, Soft Suede, More Mustard, So Saffron
Becca: Your Mom is really classy.
Photography By: Nick Tobar
The names of the Veda Vyasas of each Dvapara Yuga :
Fax: ++49-421-7925820
In fact, I could put his favorite dog biscuit on the floor right under his nose, tell him to stay and he would stare a hole in the biscuit until I said, "OK, go get it!"
Be sure to make an appointment ahead of time (ask your stylist) so you can get your hair into the best condition (ask about color options too!) possible for that big day. Try on different styles until you find that perfect one that pleases your bride but most of all makes you feel beautiful and ready for anything!
Of course, the perfect pot was proud of its accomplishments.
just that and it proves no man is an isle.
Mrs Mackay woke to find the knife pointed at her.
2 resembled
I am not doing this experience for glory, popularity, notoriety or believing it is any more important than what someone else does with their days. Actually I don’t like being thought of as dedicated or inspirational or more important than anyone else.
On the one hand, there are the Calvinists who so emphasize the divine causality as to diminish free will. Indeed, their doctrine of double-predestination makes man to be nothing more than a donkey, ridden either by Satan into hell or by God into heaven.
26. 124 was spiteful. —Toni Morrison, Beloved (1987)
A happy bride, a happy groom, a happy wallet, ba-da-boom!
Room 1
He tells her he is the only one she needs
And I failed this month with the 30 posts in 30 days. I didn't get to post last night as I was having some serious contractions. :( They're better, but still with me. I can't have the baby until after Rob gets back from China tomorrow though, so..... lol (Not like it would happen anyway. I've never dropped a baby early, including those two up there. *snicker* If we want to talk about having babies late though....) I'm still going to try to post everyday anyway as I like it.
The nationwide Eisenhower interstate system was built to be used as emergency aircraft runways, for example – and it is far too huge to be able to destroy.
In this WaKiGa the spiritual connection to nature is particular to Christa and her connection with wilderness and mother earth. She is inspired by Tom Brown jr, Coyote teaching, the wilderness pedagogy and recent training with John Young who has been making contact with the wilderness schools in Germany and is now coming to England She describes it as 'making strings to nature'. "When you see a mole you make a thin string, when you get closer to it it makes a stronger rope. This gives you a level of resilience."
I did not take down my Snow Buddies after Christmas, just removed the Christmas ones and replaced them with Valentine Snow Buddies .......
From there, I continued on South Brentwood headed South and made a left (East) on Clayton road. I ran past the galleria at this point, and I took a picture only to come to the realization that I don’t really like the mall. It’s great for some people, but the times I usually find myself there are during hectic and stress-filled times like Christmas and other gift-giving holidays. Not the greatest association for me. So with that thought, I decided not to include the photo. You’re welcome.
Gainsbourg has worked with Trier before, most recently in Antichrist. She cries a bit, but theres nothing to act here. Kiefer Sutherland, the 24 star, plays Gainsbourg’s wife and he is trying to deny that the planet will be eclipsed.
brings a deep white cup,
So how do we make decisions and choices that serve us?
Many folk in the Mac ‘n Cheese network are considering going out on their own, which can be a very scary thought/action. What advice do you have for them?
5. Prizewinning
FIC G
- After World War II, with the creation of a giant steel mill, the city became an industrial center with a new working class and a jump in population growth.
I own four bottles of perfume – three are branded and one, which is my favourite – was $6. I bought it in the USA a few years ago and it has lasted! I’m not the sort of person who goes in for brands – in fact the perfume is probably the only branded thing that I own. It’s worth the cost…
With our expert team’s combined experience in graphic design, web development, flash design and E-Commerce solutions, you can be confident that whatever your project demands, our team can deliver on time and in budget.
If you like bridges and circuses this book is worth a look, but get it from the library.
202 dazed and confused
Now... it just so happens to be a NEW RELEASE DAY here at Teddy Bo Towers and here they are - the fantastic new Teddy Bo & Teddy Bea images ready to order now!!
I'm not going to change my style or try to coerce my kids into praying out loud every night. But I am going to cherish the times they want to share that conversation with me.
A quick search with your favorite search engine will give you lots of ideas for using this story for a wide variety of lessons--easily adaptable for a wide range of age groups. Be sure to take a moment on the author's bio blurb on the book flap and visit the author's website at http://www.lynnecherry.com/
As a resolution for May, I have decided to be more “in the moment” by simply letting go of other stresses, worries and anxieties. There is no one in this world who has no problems, and it is impossible to become an individual who has no stresses… therefore there is no point in even beginning to reduce your stresses, because once you do, another one will creep up.
The story itself was absolutely gripping and a real page turner. Clear your day because once you've picked this book up you won't be able to stop until you've reached the end! Kimberly Derting has pulled out all the stops to create a plot which is thrilling, heart pounding and exciting. The final page by itself is jaw-droppingly good and I'm thrilled that there's set to be another book in the series.
"Jacob is travelling with the flocks and other gifts he is taking to his brother Esau in the hope of appeasing his anger. A stranger appears, blocking his path, and engages him in a fierce struggle which ends when Jacob is struck on the nerve of his thigh by his adversary, rendering him powerless. The holy book see this struggle as a symbol of the trials God sometimes sends His chosen ones."
Papers - K and co - I think- (had them so long I'm not sure)
Three ‘fronts’ for President Obama this week.
Second issue, Food. Need I say more!
How much nice would I have been had I not said "Hey! We went to school together and now your kids go to this school? Good to see you!" That's all I should have said because every time I think back to then, that's what I know I should have said.
½ cup nonhydrogenated shortening
to stimulate your creative juices and generate fresh inspiration - Ten Tips to Inspire Creativity. I have a handful of REALLY COOL projects I'm working on that I'll be able to share in the coming weeks. We are taking today to "get our house in order" before the post Holiday, work week of real life turns us into our mere mortal selves at the stroke of midnight tonight! Happy New Year dear Blog friends, I appreciate your faithful reading.
"And I just had the best time of my entire life doing this job. Honestly, I've got to say that. So obviously I'm going to be sad to be going and I'm going to be leaving my best mates behind. But you know, all things come to a natural end and that's what the show's about: Change. And you just kind of have to embrace it and go with it."
“Why yes, I do in fact think a lot of myself.” Peter said with self-assurance.
1 carrot, cut into 6-8 pieces
But hey, he liked the kid.
That’s a twenty-to-one spread within a so-called partnership. And some of the biggest winners had multi-year guaranteed compensation deals.
However, while the sun maybe out, it is not quite yet time for skirts and maxis, as it remains on the chilly side. Here we have an outfit inspiration modeled by Ade, that shows how to wear a winter wrap with your spring outfit. This mean you can still look chic enough for the sun, but not freeze your socks off :)
We rounded out the day with dinner at one of Zoë’s favorite restaurants, Red Robin. We love the Red Robin birthday club. She has gotten her free birthday meal there for the past few years. Alison, Alex, Joshie & Lizzie all joined us. Zoë & Lizzie discussed bras on the ride over. Yep, you read that right. My Aunt Brenda, who was already Zoë’s favorite Aunt, has pretty much got the “favorite Aunt” title for life. She gave Zoë 3 sets of matching bras and underwear. When Zoë asked me to get her a bra a while ago, I laughed at her. When she told me she had friends at summer camp with bras, I laughed even harder. Now, thanks to the world’s greatest Aunt, she has been wearing a teeny tiny bra every day. I can’t even think about it without rolling my eyes. To top off this ridiculousness, this miniscule bra has the nerve to have a hook in the back and straps that can be tightened. (There go my eyes rolling again.) Zoë has put a bra on under her clothes, each day, by herself. Yesterday, it was on upside down. It’s usually hanging up around her neck like some sort of bra necklace. She also informed me that 3 bras just weren’t enough, she needed more. I told her to take that up with her favorite Aunt.
We are cutting it close on time, but we may just make it. We realize we haven't come to one of the exits after a period of time. We should be near the school by now. We see a sign that confuses us. Seventy-four miles to our destination. How can that be? I call the school. Ugh. When I looked up the school online last night, I SWEAR it said the school was in Marion. I swear. I cannot find those websites now for proof, of course. Last night when I googled, I could not find a website for the school, just some independent sites with generic information. Okay, I thought. It's a private Catholic school. Maybe they don't have their own website. So I call the school for better directions. The school is not in Marion, it's in Marion COUNTY!!! !@#$%^&*(
I am a human. I make mistakes. I try harder not to make ones that are going to negatively affect others, but sometimes I even make those. When I do make mistakes, I make things right as best as I can, I learn how not to make the same mistake again, I accept what consequences come my way, and then I move on.
Approximately one third of participating physicians reported they did not completely agree that they should disclose medical errors to patients (20% of whom admitting they were afraid of being sued for malpractice). TIME Healthland reports that 40 percent felt they did not need to disclose financial ties to drug or device companies.
Mr Boss has no objection to my looking into the accredited classes accessible to adults in Paris. (!!!) What would happen is that I would change my current contract (average of 14 hours a week in CDI - permanent contract) to a Contract d'Apprentissage (an apprentice contract, and yes, it's available for adults in certain conditions), in which I would work full time, 35 hours a week, with my classes included in the 35 hours, and I'll be paid a percentage of minimum wage (53% I think?), but will still make more than I'm earning right now. My time at work would be divided up in doing what I do right now with the least amount of shuffling as possible, so as not to mess up the schedules of my colleagues, and the whatever time is left in the bookbinding workshop. Whatever money I make in addition to what I'm making now should cover all the traveling between here and Paris. After I receive my diploma, we would revert back to my present contract and I can continue to work there while I'm building up my bookbinding business.
"Carl Edward Sagan ( /ˈseɪɡən/; November 9, 1934 – December 20, 1996) was an American astronomer, astrophysicist, cosmologist, author, science popularizer and science communicator in astronomy and natural sciences. He published more than 600 scientific papers and articles and was author, co-author or editor of more than 20 books. He advocated scientifically skeptical inquiry and the scientific method, pioneered exobiology and promoted the Search for Extra-Terrestrial Intelligence (SETI).
Director of Photography: Jon Joffin
Refer back to the first part of this to see how to do the larger part of the desk. For the smaller part, you will attach it to the larger desk using your "L" brackets. I also attached the spindles (legs). There may have been an easier way, but this was how I did it. Then I used the smaller boards to put around the desk, just for looks.
I love that there was a diagonal wood pattern in this paper pad. It allowed me to make each card different in orientation as well as color. I'm thinking about making some more of these cards, I think they would look so sweet packaged up together as a gift.
All in favor..stay tuned to this post.
The third project I am happy about was for Chase. I also crocheted a blanket for him. Another project I did last year was a scrapbook that showcase my son. My son will be celebrating his eighteen birthday in Febuary. More about the scrapbook in 2012.
There has been an outcry of disgust and dismay across the state regarding the provisions of the deal. Twitter feeds have been lit up, blogs are being written, teachers are considering their next move, administrators are wondering how to implement, school boards are wondering how to pay for this, consultants are jumping for joy as they await a windfall, students are wondering why another test, parents are confused, local papers are opining as fast as they could, researchers are combing for any supporting research, politicians are plotting their next strategic step, and the madness escalates
However surprised and thrilled I was when our sweet little 3 year old neighbor said “LITTER!” and ran to pick it up. We had fun with it and tried to pick up all the litter on our way there and back. THEN she put it all into the recycling bin.
No shipping fee if you pick up wood blocks from INDEXG
Now, I'm no Katarina Witt, but my mum and dad took me skating ocasionally as a child so I can stay upright and move round the rink.
If you are a parent with a son or daughter who has transgender issues, whether or not he or she lives under your roof, I advise you read about gender issues from recognized sources of current information. Do not rely on television talk shows or uninformed persons, it is likely their facts are sensationalistic or extremely biased. Instead, seek advice from a gender-specializing counselor or sexologist. If your child has questions, refer him or her to gender-specialized help, also. Additionally, many gay, lesbian youth groups will welcome a transgender child. Even though gender identity and sexual orientation are different, many of the questions and concerns are similar. Finally,. parents can receive support through organizations such as PFLAG, (Parents & Friends of Lesbians & Gays) who also welcome parents of transgender individuals.
The film revolves around the relationship between Odin and his two sons. The action spans Asgard, Midgard and Jotunheim, the realm of the Frost Giants. Kenneth Branagh as the director deserves a fair amount of credit in taking a complicated premise in terms of mythology and creating an entertaining romp through that mythology a la Marvel Comics. The movie is extremely family friendly and teaches good lessons about humility, honoring one’s parents and courage without superpowers. Not a bad way to spend a family outing.
The United Nation’s FAO, along with its CODEX ALIMENTARIUS, has been PUSHING ANIMAL CLONING FOR YEARS. So this issue isn’t about too many animals on the earth, or the environment, or feeding the hungry – it’s most likely about who owns the patents for the cloned animals and biotechnology, and who will own and control all food (and people, land and resources) in the future.
2 summer squash, quartered lengthwise and cut into 1-inch pieces
Donald had a stumble moment in his dance as well, but he didn’t let it get him down – he kept on going. He was so smooth and he obviously loved Motown night.
Ce Zoïle cagot naquit d'une Javotte.
Ever feel like your life and everyone in it is conspiring to be in your way. Maybe today just isn’t your day and yesterday wasn’t either. It’s so easy to let the little voice in your head bring you down, it’s even easier to let the voices of the people around you bring you down. You have to be stronger than that, Be your own voice reminding yourself of all the good and talented things you’ve done recently and that these little annoyances won’t be around forever.
Here are the corrected sentences:
5........I can tap dance
Why does this occur? Perhaps it is because Arslan's character is never presented as being "just" evil or "just" anything; he is, just like President Clinton was a philanderer who was still admired for his policies by many despite his numerable character flaws. Arslan is a breath of life compared to the stolid, sometimes smug Franklin Bond. He achieves things, he overcomes certain socio-political roadblocks that just aren't broken in contemporary representative democracies. His dismissive attitude to his own power is beguiling because it promises a possible non-corruptive personality, even if subsequent events might lead one to question that presumption. He has power over the other characters precisely because he has control over himself. He may weep, he may rage, but what Arslan does best is expect. This is seen in how quickly he overcomes Bond and others with his force of personality; he expects them to hate him, distrust him, revile him, but also to ultimately obey him because they have run out of other alternatives. This might ring untrue to most reading it, but there is a certain appeal to this powerful cult of personality that certainly has its parallels in several charismatic leaders of the past two centuries whose callous actions still garnered them admiration from their purportedly-repressed constituents.
What started out as a beautiful ivy that I replanted last month, quickly turned into a shriveled up clump of dirt. It lived in the bathroom, but I still watered it and took it out to the dining room every few days for some light. I guess it didn't matter, because my black thumb struck again.
The pattern went together perfectly. I dawdled (I was still on holidays) as I made it so it took too long. Drawing the yarns to get that fringe look out was kinda therapeutic. I should go back and run a line of zig-zag stitch across them to ensure they don’t fray but next time I get my domestic machine out will have to do.
Struck (Struck #1)
When it comes to file transfer speed, the Windows 8 consumer preview seems not to have lived upto users’ expectations. The astonishing result was that Windows 7 copied faster than the Consumer Preview of the new OS. The speed tests for the same were performed on ASUS Zenbook UX31, Samsung Series 7, and Dell Inspiron 15. In the case of ASUS Zenbook UX31 and Samsung Series 7, the difference between file transfer speed of Windows 7 and Windows 8 was quite significant. And that’s really disappointing for Microsoft’s most ambitious project.
Tom gasped.
"Carol's dead," my mother said.
boots-Junya Watanabe Comme des Garcons
Afterthoughts - wood - hostess Level 1 Stamp set
Anyhow...I'm sure most of y'all have similar memories. I mean, who among us hasn't, at one point in our life, operated an old-fashioned lemonade/Kool-Aid stand. I hope your memories of those days are as sweet as mine. I hope, also, that you might be similarly inspired to seek out a once-dear friend and renew your acquaintance with her. Doing that will undoubtedly be even sweeter than the lemonade ever was!
Solution: Swap the chocolate for spinach, nuts and seeds and soy beans. (Try graze!!) If you must have chocolate have dark chocolate instead as it apparently contains triple the magnesium of milk chocolate, so you’ll need less to feel full (less FAT/Calories too!).
Finally, I forced myself to finish it and will now try to get Piers Dudgeon's general arguments in a nutshell. This will not be easy because his book swings back and forth like a pendulum, between the DuMaurier family -- particularly Daphne DuMaurier, author of Rebecca and The Birds among many other things, and her grandfather George DuMaurier, creator of Svengali -- and Barrie himself. (Daphne's aunt Sylvia DuMaurier was the mother of the five Llewellyn-Davies brothers.)
Sugar. It's one of those things isn't it? We know it's bad for us but we love it. The headaches lately have been a bit of a nuisance so a sugar free spell was started yesterday.
I can honestly say, I was a bit torn on the uses of and how I wanted to use QR Codes for Marketing in my industry.
“Does his head look like an onion?” Nikolas pointed at Leonard.
My image is Saturated Canary. I just love Krista's images. They are such beauty's. I colored her with Copics and I added Stickles only on the dove's heart and on her buttons.
There is life and healing
Every month they publish the recipe in the bulletin the week prior. I have an ancient copy in my recipe box. Meals are delivered to the parish center by 9:30 in the morning and then a group of volunteers transport the food to the facility and serve.
If I can manage this,I might adopt it as a strategy for writing -a novel in a month and then eleven months off!
#11 Jenny H.
When I once lived in paradise
This didn't instill much confidence in me for our business venture, the one thing it did tell me is our advertising has to go further a field to be successful.
We are in full swing at VBS this year and having a great time, so my posts will be pretty short this week.
Just wondering.. who drew your, Er, lovely drawing of you? My guess is clay but who knows?
Details about your first personal art piece:
Normally, these things are just part of my day. But for some reason, everything is irritating.
The Beat
Right that is it.
I was supposed to meet Mark at the bar at 8:30, but I was about fifteen minutes late (it was totally worth it, but that’ll have to be a different post). As I leaned in to hug him, I could smell the alcohol on his breath. He flagged down the server and ordered another cherry vodka and Red Bull, but the glass was about ¾ full of vodka with only a splash of Red Bull. He had about four of these over the course of our date, and he admitted to drinking before coming to the bar too. Normally, that wouldn’t bother me, but he had to have his brother drop him off at the bar. Needless to say, the date was awful.
Bush posed for pictures with the U.S. players and staff. May-Treanor and her partner Kerri Walsh took a break in practice so Bush could try out a few bumps himself.
Hawkins ushered Sister Sarah in and followed. They sat on a couch that the man indicated. "Hello. I'm Elder Hawkins, and this is Sister Sarah. We're from the Church of-- "
But this project is all dependent on time. To succeed I'll need the time and space to write a short story a month as well as write the drafts required for the Traitor of Light. It won't be easy, and I've learned enough in the last year not to over-stretch myself, so I'll be playing it by ear - as ever.
I realize I've forgotten my all important paperwork and 2x2 passport sized photos in my nice neat folder by the door where I wouldn't forget it just after checking in at the ticket counter, but not before going through security theater.
Cookie.
But the truth is that not everybody in Hazleton likes what Maddon is trying to do. After all, he doesn't live here any more. He doesn't understand what day-to-day life is like here. He is a famous baseball manager now who deals with famous baseball manager things. There are some in town who feel like he is lecturing them, others who think he is well-meaning but unrealistic. The dinner is a smashing success, but one cannot help but notice that almost every one of the 560 people who attend is white.
Not many days after we meet with her, we left the country. On the plane ride home my Aunt was sitting next to a woman and explained what we wanted to do. The woman listened intently then stopped her and said, "I am rich, my friends are rich, let us help you" WOW, what a miracle! I mean WHO SAYS THAT??!!! But the Lord wasn't done in helping Mrs Francois raise funds for her special school.
I strongly encourage you to take a moment to read what he's said. You will be blessed. I have no doubt.
It almost feels as if everyone I work with now is more real than before, sharing some sort of adventure. You know: wait tables by day and write a groundbreaking novel at night-the characters based loosely on a cast of regular customers. But the truth is, I don’t know of anyone doing that. All they do is come in the next morning saying “I really don’t want to be here right now… I can’t believe I had that many drinks last night. I was so f***ed up”
ZACH: But, I can’t.
Because we don’t have an entry closet I simply added some hooks; baskets and a bench to increase our usable space. This is a trick I like to use as a previous professional organizer. My handy hubs helped me to create a coat rack out of spare wooden hangers we had laying around and some reclaimed wood. We love it. It now houses jackets, hats, and shoes for all of us, including our little man Oliver Tate. The stool was a retro flea market find that we simply recovered and it creates the perfect place to put down my purse. The basket, which is locally crafted, houses sticks and pinecones from our daily family walks.
I just thought I would share a few songs and scriptures that help me in times like these in hopes that they may touch someone else as well.
In these times of global warming and climate change, one is never prepared enough for the mighty forces of nature or in some cases, man-made disasters, such as the Fukushima Nuclear Plant or in Southern Philippines’ Cagayan de Oro flash flood tragedy caused by illegal logging. For those especially in vulnerable and hazard zones like Japan & Philippines, every one must be aware and be prepared.
Mandy Slater – Internal Communication #4
Then Ryan and I textured the ceiling and primed the room (Thanks for the ceiling texture how-to, You Tube!). Then we laid a wood floor (probably my favorite part of the room!).
What on Earth was he talking about?
6. Why is it a law (at least in my part of America) that you must wear a seat belt, but a bus load of school children ride without one?
1/4 teaspoon coarse salt (I doubled this)
How exciting to be the first to receive it in the mail.
7a. Now do a soft fold, YOU DO NOT WANT TO SCORE OR CREASE THIS FOLD! You're going to bring your two outside edges together as you see below, and hold it towards the base, with your thumb and forefinger so you leave a nice soft curve fold which makes the larger outside petal of the flower.
Harlow SD, Matanoski GM. The association between weight, physical activity, and stress, and variation in the length of the menstrual cycle. Am J Epidemiol 1991; 133: 38-49.
Undaunted by the changes in local events, our friend Bob, ( he of the chicken dance and Alzheimer’s ), just kept moving through time eternal as though nothing else ever happens, which it doesn‘t in his world, as he ambles through his daily routines.
Sunday was the third Brew Day in the past week. And for the third time in as many brew sessions, the beer of choice was a session beer. After experimenting with The Ultimate Table Beer last week, I opted for a more traditional style this time. Enter Hwart's Bitter (MB0029).
Again, I went thin and printed on basic printer paper, except I printed a bit of the quilted coral on cardstock to punch my Martha Stewart butterflies. I kept seeing these teeny tiny beauties on other cards, so I finally located a punch and bought it. I keep resisting the urge to punch butterflies out of everything I see. LOL I took some light orange and yellow pearls which I touched up with R35 Copics to more closely match my papers.
friends triune,
Sugar, White or Brown
She does look like she was thinking about throwing that ball when she was overcome by drowsiness. Perhaps she’ll toss it when she awakens. Next up: halfpipe while blindfolded.
The British Freedom Party is proud to be part of this new Europe wide movement of national freedom and democracy, and we are proud to join the struggle against the common enemy we all face as nationalists and patriots. That enemy is the European Union and its political puppets in all the mainstream political parties who do its bidding.
“The box that you packed clothes in that’s here in the wardrobe?” (Less puzzled, more annoyed simmering dread.)
Friend: To get to Gravier, go out and turn right, then cross over to…..
And poor her! Poor her, because her job didn’t appreciate her talents and she was probably going to quit and find a better one. She could totally relate to me.
What else? I needed him there, to knock & push the dwarf, tie up the other, but no such luck... too important so I try a reoll, but I roll a 1 and fail the loner, so it stands.
Tacoma Dome
Tara Yvette Hobbs, 31, New York, N.Y.
What is your "O" word of the day?
nature of the alleged abuse.
I am still craving for their satay until this very day. The meat is grilled to perfection. There ain't much fat on the meat and the texture is just to my liking. The sauce is pretty average but the meat is well marinated and full of flavour.
Now the needle goes back into the fabric on the middle guideline. It is going to go into the fabric between the two threads making up the slanted stitch. It will go in on the middle guide line slanting to the right. The needle will emerge on the right guide line:
Unfortunately, all of the excitement left no time of respite for Ian. His epilepsy was beginning to get unwound, due to his frantic schedule. Nothing but work; any time not spent gigging was spent in the studio rehearsing. It's interesting for me to know this, especially, given the legendary quality of the final two songs he managed to produce during this period. When and where exactly they were conceived, I have no idea. I wish they were early enough to be considered for recording and release on "Closer", but
It works. He shouts too, YES, GO AWAY BAD TRAFFIC. WE WANT TO GO TO TOY SCHOOL. GO AWAY!
By first believe in Santa Claus, then the Easter Bunny, then the Tooth Fairy, Rant Casey was recognizing that those myths are more than pretty stories and traditions to delight children. Or to modify behavior. Each of those three traditions asks a child to believe in the impossible in exchange for a reward. These are stepped-up tests to build a child's faith and imagination. The first test is to believe in a magical person, with toys as the reward. The second test is to trust in a magical animal, with candy as the reward. The last test is the most difficult, with the most abstract reward: To believe, trust in a flying fairy that will leave money.
Aquaman #7
The Final Solution, Michael Chabon
Puget Energy, Inc., Alternative Energy Deals By Type, 2006 to YTD 2012 6
Saucony have different types of running shoes for different kinds of feet because each person has different shape of feet. This is very important when you are buying a pair of shoes. You have to consider the pronation of your feet. Basically, there are three types of pronation; overpronation means flat feet, underpronation means high arch and neutral pronation means average arch. This pronation factor is very important in running because the arching in your foot creates the motion control. And the right shoe pronation will most likely protect you from getting foot injury. You have to remember that when it comes to buying a pair of shoes, you have to make sure that you are comfortable with the right kind of shoes for right type of activity.
1 cup plain reduced-fat (2%) Greek-style yogurt
The CD? Good tunes, if a bit heavy on reggae for my tastes (do small labels get reggae artists for the same reason small breweries do ales: it's easier and cheaper?). The Smoked Porter, on the other hand, was very much to my tastes. Porter, no matter what else it is, should be drinkable, downright quaffable. If it isn't, I think it misses the whole point of being porter. Gorges doesn't let the smoke get in your eyes and overwhelm the porter, it's not gaggingly bitter, and it's not woozily strong. Mostly it tasted "moreish," as the sainted MJ used to say.
Regular readers will note that every now and then I do an "In Memoriam", honoring a public figure that has recently passed away. I give the name, the years of birth and death, occupation, a list of notable works (books, movies, TV shows, etc.) and a quote of some sort. I try to find a suitable quote that comes directly from the deceased themselves, but if that proves impossible, I'll use a quote by a third party about the deceased instead. Sometimes, if one quote just doesn't sum up that person's essence, I'll use two or more. On rare occasions, I'll explain just what it was about the deceased that interested me. If the public figure's not quite public enough, I'll provide a link.
What extra things are you doing in your life that may interfere with your raw ability to love? What extra expectation are you putting on others that inhibit their ability to love you back, or may lead you to be less loving of them?
KEEP THEM.
Here is what I am thinking for bridesmaids
Happy Tuesday everyone! Did you have a good weekend? Mine was a busy one. The ravioli making was actually very fun. I'd never made pasta before! I have a 'pasta' machine for my clay, but I don't think it's the same lol! Anyway, the Butternut Squash Ravioli turned out YUMMY : D
“Even the maximum volume on the iPad can sometimes seem a little quiet, which has prompted many of us to perform thet tried-and-true ‘cup your hand over the speaker’ trick that gets us a little more sound –which works really well for a quick video clip but isn’t terribly practical or comfortable for more than a few seconds. Fortunately, coregeek has a DIY solution called the SoundScoop that should help you out at a cost ringing in around USD $0.99…
I am perfect just like as My Heavenly Father is perfect! Amen!
I was lucky enough to meet Kelly at the recent Twissup in Manchester. He was happy to chat about his impending move, my relatives and the up and coming Craft Beer scene in Christchurch.
(I project that demand on others, too.)
Stamps: Berry Sweet (Flourishes)
Step 6. Create different mindmaps and then translate to word document, pdfs, powerpoints, websites based on a particular purpose.
I’m not sure what to expect out of my 30s. The last significant birthday I had was 21. People love to tell other people about the time they turned 21.
Beat together the butter and sugar until well incorporated. Then mix in the egg, egg yolk, zest and almond extract. In a separate bowl, whisk together the flour, ground almonds, salt, finely chopped rosemary and baking powder. Gradually add the dry ingredients to the wet until the mixture just comes together. Take about ¾ of the dough and pat it into a disc shape, wrap it in plastic and put it in the fridge. Take the remaining dough and roll it into a log shape about 2ins (5cm) in diameter, wrap it in plastic and chill both pieces for about half an hour.
New from Crystal Vision is the FTX-L 3G – a fibre optic transmitter designed to transmit 3Gb/s, HD or SD signals over large distances in a robust, reliable and space-saving way and including two input loop-throughs ideal for system checking or distributing input video.
Purple paisley skirt: thrifted from Rerun
"The leak in the Gulf of Mexico is relatively tiny compared with the size of the ocean."
2 Packages of Taco Seasoning (1 if you are only using a pound of hamburger)
- Man’s Origin, Man’s Destiny (A.E Wilder-Smith)
According to the charge sheet, the Western Cape Directorate for Public Prosecutions (DPP) authorised a police trap in which an undercover police official allegedly paid her R4 500 for a tog bag containing a police cap and a reflector jacket, a pair of police socks, a police shirt, two pairs of police trousers and ammunition.
Happy Beltane everyone!
But no. She's got a Ziploc bag in one hand and she starts scooping me up and dumping me in the bag. Of course I'm wondering what the hell is going on. I'm flour. I don't belong in Ziploc bags.
was thinking. He was going to make her pay for delaying the hunt for his late
First and foremost, a seller should make sure their home is well-maintained and that it looks well-maintained,” he said. “Before a seller starts making improvements like adding new energy-efficient windows — which are nice to have, but not something a buyer would truly care that much about — I recommend they make sure the structural integrity of the house is sound.
As local newspapers are losing more and more readers, it's my belief they need to focus more on the talents in the community, and not just by listing where and when a specific person is having a reading, etc. Tell them about the book. Let the readers tell us about a book they read. Get everyone involved. Frankly, I don't see the difference between a local author who publishes via a University Press and/or a small publishing company who sells a handful of "real" books, versus a self-published independent author who may even sell more books on-line than either of those. It's the story that matters, not the ISBN number, or if a book is in a brick and mortar store. The times, they are a changing, and newspapers need to change with them. My advice to them...Take a page from Daytime Blue Ridge...Stop following and start leading!
Please note that Lower Rainham Road itself will have cones on both sides of the road and that a strictly no parking policy will be in operation.
Moreover, the Court condemns each one of the Defendant societies to pay a compulsory pecuniary sanction in the amount of 1000 euros for each day that the prohibitions or the order to apprehend the books and the videos are not respected.
Green demon
- Birding supplies and options appear to be growing.
Intricacies of Business Correspondence
Market officially starts tomorrow, and even though it's a little, okay way late, I want to finally share my little invite. (above) Hosting Society Social is Acacia Home & Garden, a company that is more dear to my heart than you can imagine, and you can find a few of my bar carts in their beautiful showroom situated right beside the Pavilions. Of course if you're at High Point Market, and of course only if you would like to stop by.
Wagner's Gotterdammerung, which I was pleased she didn't dismiss, is sometimes translated as Twilight of the Gods but can mean Death of the Gods.
After winning a series against the best team in the MLB, the Jays take off for a road trip to Southern California where they will have a 4-game set against the Angels followed by a 3-game set against the A’s. Starting things off for the Angels is a much improved Brandon Morrow. Coming off 6 shutout innings in his last start, Morrow hopes to continue his dominance against an underachieving Angels team. Morrow is 2-0 with a 1.01 ERA over his last four road starts dating to last season, during which he’s limited opponents to a .167 average. He is 0-2 with a 4.76 ERA in three career starts versus the Angels. GM Farrell has high praise for his young starter off to a good start to the season:
Things look better in the morning
…and I guffaw.
Cellulite is hard to get rid of.Its a combination of fat globules,waste matter and water trapped in connective tissues.
Now please don’t understand, I am not complaining. God has been faithful to meet all my needs, always every time. More than anything I wrestle with balance. How do I balance my need to create, my calling to do this ministry with the realities of everyday life? Have you been in this place?
The repetitive strain injury was back.
And now for some Seuss inspired projects that my class completed yesterday. I did not get to take as many pics as I would have liked, but here are a few...
The Wide Horizon. Loula Grace Erdman. 1956/2007. Bethlehem Books. 279 pages.
This makes it all the more important to look at the facts now while they're still warm. When General Eisenhower's troops came across the Nazi death camps he immediately understood that the perpetrators and their apologists would later try to deny the facts and alter history. So within hours of the discovery he ordered his troops to shoot film, gather evidence, and seek out those responsible.
The last weeks I'm drinking so much tea plus my daily coffee dose.
Within the last couple of days CNBC featured television specials on Facebook and Google that gave viewers a glimpse inside the business model of each company and how they have affected our global landscape. It was amazing, fascinating, and alarming.
Denver Chop House & Brewery Dark Munich Lager
I'd had my hair done especially at the salon by Lou, lots of blonde hair, curls and waves and all the curls at the back pinned up. Definitely not a look I've tried before but absolutely fabulous.
Finally after watching the little GPS map from our cabin, we were about to fly over Haiti and enter the Dominican Republic. We flew right over ground zero and the area we were to stay in. From the sky, I could see all of the tent cities, rubble, the remarkable country side, and even some “tiny” vehicles driving across the terrain. I to this day cannot (in words) express the feelings that were rushing through my body at what I saw. After just a couple of minuets of flying across these two countries, we finally landed in the Dominican Airport.
I still can't get over how many people came up here for this retreat! Even with the snowstorm. What an amazing group of people - an interesting mix of skills and characters - and even a few men. Whoo-hoo! Linda Pearl did an impressive job getting it all pulled together and she is already planning another retreat for the last weekend in September (write that in your calendar!) UN-Tangle 2 will be a day longer and will have some business stuff added in. I'll tell you more about it when I can.
No further communication from the Chairman led to:
Helen peered in at her with concern. “Come this way, we all need to talk.”
against ASDA that has gone on for
Note: You will need to use your judgment to adjust the amount of topping depending on whether you make the original recipe or half recipe, regular sized muffins or mini, and the number of flavors you decide to make.
Tuesday: Easy Citrus Chicken
So if you’ve been following the rollercoaster ride of GSC Game World and their follow up PC title, S.T.A.L.K.E.R. 2 then I’m afraid after a long battle, things have fallen apart for this developer. It was confirmed yesterday that the anticipated sequel has been cancelled and the studio itself shut down.
If you are a woman, and you hold Friedrich Nietzsche in high esteem as one of the great enlightened thinkers of modern philosophy, there is a decent chance you might be unfamiliar with the full extent of the man’s musings about the fairer sex. Since his own lifetime, the philosopher has been accused of promoting misogynistic ideas in his writings, due to his tendency of abrasively referring to women—and femininity as a whole—in largely hostile terms (as we shall explore shortly). However, it should be stated for the sake of objectivity, that this sentiment is not universally accepted amongst prominent female authors and thinkers, as some of these individuals interpret Nietzsche’s apparently sexist aphorisms as a rhetorical strategy, used to illustrate the vain construct men have of women, and the potential to possibly move beyond this simplistic sentiment.[1] Whether any of these more favorable interpretations are viable positions in light of Nietzsche’s own words, or simply attempts to exonerate the philosopher of the charge of misogyny, is the focus of the analysis that follows below. Although Nietzsche never wrote a single cumulative work on the topic of womanhood, his books are nevertheless filled with countless critiques and examinations of the female psych, thereby making it possible for the reader to gather a coherent impression of the philosopher’s views on women, and gender relations in general.
A participant from India, Hussain Mudavoor, was upbeat about the timing and holding of the international meet and praised King Abdullah and the MWL for organizing the conference.
September 15th.
Once you have your paper cut out in the size you want, I generally use my Xacto knife to score my folds (very gently, I really don't even push, just drag the blade gently across the paper). I score the "pretty side" of my paper, not the back. A ruler helps to keep your lines straight, if you don't trust yourself scoring the paper, you can also line up your ruler and fold against it to keep your folds crisp.
She saw the helmet and the plume,
And manage to cut my lip on the floor.
We had lots of snack food for the evening.
By Phoebe Sakarombe
Big Eyed Beans from Venus! Oh my, oh my.
I wish everyone a blessed and happy New Year!
which brings me closer to you;
This studio is now gone, and nobody will ever record in it again. It was Sandro’s house for a long time. Over ten years I believe. And he was always paying rent, and, after he turned it into a studio, the owner would not sell the house to him without trying to rip him off. Now it is part of a history that involved a lot of people, a lot of music, a lot of concentration and dedication – a history that has moved into other places and other songs, that can’t be stopped but which remains alive thanks to recording and sharing technologies.
* Steampunk as Social Change
I put kitties food. Below are a few shots I was
okay last..
09 Your So Good To Me
The external and internal journey are juxtaposed throughout and emotionally she explores the caution, the fear the sense of loss and longing, the feelings engendered by isolation and fellowship. Throughout the book Carroll wrestles with the difference between being a tourist and being a traveller and ultimately resolves this issue. The difference of pace is one thing but there’s much more to it than that.
(Audible sigh of relief..)
Ola Dubh is a fantastic beer, and a fantastic range of beers (12,16,18,30,40yrs) from the ever impressive Harviestoun Brewery. If you've not heard of the beer before (I'm sure you have) it's Harviestoun's Old Engine Oil aged for some time in Highland Park Whisky casks (in different respectable ages) and basically translates as 'Black Oil'. This 8% beer pours intensely black in colour, with the most inviting of aromas consisting of; liquorice, roasted grain, oak, vanilla, dried fruit and a little chocolate. The flavours are thick, rich and moorish. More of the flavours really make a push forward in the body, with a little smokiness coming through on the sides of the tongue.
Green jobs encompass many industries. For environmental professionals, it can fall into the sectors of sustainability, protection, and conservation and preservation of natural resources. Within these areas are many different types of jobs, from consultants to scientists. It’s a broad employment range with lots of opportunities.
Michelle also designs patterns and makes small quilts using her folk art fusion technique. Her latest pattern, For The Love of Spring, really caught my eye when she showed it on her blog. Last week she sent me the pattern to test for her (it has nothing to do with the fact that I drooled when I saw it) - oh my goodness, how fun is that! I was so excited that she sent it one day and I made it the next. :) Yes, it really was that fast. An afternoon and it was done! I love the primitive look of these flowers.
Superman wasn’t the first alien to gain superpowers by hopping planets. That honor goes to John Carter, Edgar Rice Burroughs’ pre-Tarzan pulp star. He premiered in All-Story magazine a hundred years ago last month. This Friday Carter takes his first superpowered leap to the big screen.
Other species you may be lucky enough to spot include the hobby – sometimes seen chasing dragonflies or swifts and swallows over the reedbeds at sites such as Attenborough – where you might also catch a glimpse of short-eared owls.
How exciting therefore when Jesus says: “When you pray, go into your room and shut the door and pray to your Father in secret!” That’s radical and revolutionary stuff! There are no exclusions here at all. The holy place is redefined!
I could see it in his face he has no argument to that. They know nothing about what I can do, or why I can do it. They just claim that they always knew that I would be what I am, a Managul.
(Continued from "What motivates your choices?")
And, lastly, if you have a blog, mention this giveaway on your blog and leave a comment
We bought two of these, which I'll arrange into an L shape:
well, actually, you get three of these, your choice. they were quite yummy too. so we rolled home and undid our pants and agreed that was a great way to celebrate ALL our many years together. let's hope there are many more, cuz i can't wait for all those dinners!!!
We got a question that came in to us and — let me put it up there and I’ll read it to you. “How would you phase out Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac? Does the private mortgage industry need additional regulation?” — that from William Schmidt.
The atmosphere is undeniably amicable for such a big scene with a good mix of people. Knowledgeable middle-aged craft beer lovers can be spotted, but here and there are even some young beauties brave enough to try a Skull Splitter (some of them possibly craft beer virgins).
This article explains the problem kids face when presssured by older or more “popular” teens. This was one of my first stories that used quotes and statistics from other sources and websites.
If you've been living under a rock the past couple of days, all three NYRR races are canceled this weekend. The next NYRR/Marathon qualifying run is Sept. 17 - the Fitness 4-miler, though entries are limited.
Cut off from personal family, at times under the care of sadistic individuals and without access to books or television from the outside world, imagination became a survival mechanism. As a young teenager, I secretly entertained commune children with fantastic stories that took us through time and space, until these sins were discovered by cult leaders. Several laboriously hand-written books were confiscated and burned and I was ordered on pain of--well, a whole lot of pain--never to write again.
8. Playing in the Band - 23:30
This isn't very suprising considering it came from Brazil, the country that brought us Carnival, maybe even the thong bathing suit. I wonder if they set up tastings in maternity or baby stores?
How do people handle these things elsewhere?
The summer sun may turn dark and cold (I Love You, LY) ‘Round and ’round we spin and dance
"I don't want to live with myself," said Barley. "I can't think of anybody worse to live with."
I’ve made peace with the past, I’ve let go of a lot of emotional baggage and now I’m ready to move forward.
Main Dishes:
Arete explains everything he is doing and why. He explains what vein is in that part of the leg, arm, hand. He knows how many layers of skin or muscle lay on top of it. He explains exactly what happens when said vein is punched, kicked, sliced.
By LENORE SKENAZY
According to The Hill, Gibbsy didn’t attend the last press conferance. Bill Burton says he’s got a cold in his nose. At least he didn’t say he wanted to spend more time with his family.
Add to that the fact that no matter who you are, you will have plenty of friends and family in South Africa. If you are like me, you feel strongly about why you had to leave (you’d have to – see the paragraph about why it is hard). When I feel strongly about something, I tend to want to proselytise others into my way of thinking. To me, getting out was a matter of life and death.
If this message comes from her, then she is very brave for asking scientologists to stop donating to the IAS and any other Scientology fundraisings as well as exposing the truth about what is happening in upper management. I wish that she had done this 20 years ago.
The problem starts with the box the gloves are kept in. Watch next time you are in a hospital. How many people wash their hands before they plunge them in to pull out a glove? What happens to the germs on that that hand? They go on to the surface of next glove in the box -- the surface that is going to be in contact with the next patient. I talked about this with my dentist (as he scratched his nose with his gloved hand). He was graphic in his description of the possibilities for germ transmission . It's not that the gloves are useless, and they genuinely do protect the professionals from our body fluids, but they also make them feel as clean on the outside of the glove as they are on the inside, and that simply isn't the case. The same goes for everyone involved in cleaning and maintenance in medical settings. Unless they change their gloves between tasks, there is no reason to think that you are any better protected from other patients' germs than you would be if the staff had bare hands.
Cast on 21 sts,
Oh My ……….we are off to the Golden Corral (I call it the Golden Trough)! LOL. Good friends and food, don’t get no better than that.
In a “the-foot-bone’s-connected-to-the-ankle-bone” connectivity, Ms. West lays out this time line in order to show that they’re not isolated incidents. Instead, “…They fit into a pattern that above all spreads “dhimmitude,”… in thrall to Islamic law.” In other words, if the Western people watch long enough, it’ll scare them into line.
que un asunto o causa pendiente en esta Corte Suprema solo se considera decidido una vez registrada, promulgada y publicada la sentencia en la escribania, y que hasta entonces el resultado de la votacion se estima como una materia absolutamente reservada y confidencial, perteneciente exclusivamente a las camaras interiores de la Corte.
In the end I had to face lots of the same problems as other "love exiles". I had to give up my career and move far away from my family. This is being felt even more now that my Mother is dealing with declining health and I would like to be there for her. But as it is, if I need to be in the U.S. for a longer period of time, I have to choose between being with my wife or being with my American family. It's really rather unfair, and it makes me into a second-class citizen... one who STILL needs to pay American taxes even though I don't live in the country.
Then I went upstairs. The stairs creaked and groaned and made lots of noises that stairs make when a family has gone up and down them for ages. That’s good. Stairs should do that sort of thing. One knows exactly which step squeaks and which one doesn't and where one has to tread if one doesn't want to make oneself heard. It was just that this staircase wasn't our staircase. Quite a different family had used it. Therefore I thought this staircase was creepy.
Be sure to visit all the Paper Pretties' blogs to see their spin on the challenge:
D: "Banana with a bruise on it and it's all brown and mushy and so it's only good for making banana bread with!" (gales of laughter ensue.)
This is also my fourth full week of math workshop and I love it. The students are always very excited to come to math class and they are working really well independently. Today i was able to pull my first small group with not one interruption! Go Me! Next week I move from place value to estimation, so I'm a little stressed about changing the games within my centers and training the students with them. I wonder how most of you are doing it. Do you always keep the same games within your workshop or do you switch them all when you move on to a new skill? I am thinking I will keep a few and add a few.
Once we cleared that up, we can imagine what would happen when we narrow all this knowledge provided by Wikipedia to strictly linguistic issues. Imagine a place intended for a specialist audience, created by academic linguists with articles that can be edited freely by any registered linguist.
My beautiful Zero teapot, which reminds me of a stout penguin
When in the lobby I saw Yvonne's smiling face.
The Stooges- 1969
Movement: Oh yes, there's movement, but only when his Daddy isn't trying to feel it - little monkey.
that i used on some hardware.
"Today, we take another major step toward true nation-to-nation collaboration," said Perrelli. "CTAS is not only a more streamlined grant-making process, it is part of the department's broader strategy of increased engagement with tribal communities across a broad range of areas."
Oh well. I was witness that there was one strange place out in the NC sticks once upon a time. But they never did let on to me the true nature of their business.
As a mixed media artist I love all those collaged backgrounds that you see for sale over at etsy! Well, with this software you can make your own so all of your art is truly "Your Art"...fab?! But one of the best parts, for me anyway, is that My Memories uses normal image file extensions, .jpg, .png unlike a lot of other programs out there that have their own special extensions. What this means is that in addition to all the fabulous kits My Memories has in their store (almost 4000 and growing!) you can upload those digi kits and papers you have purchased along the way as well as those you will purchase in the future!
How did we get here? Maybe it's pure nostalgia, but it seems that yesteryear's African rebels had a bit more class. They were fighting against colonialism, tyranny, or apartheid. The winning insurgencies often came with a charming, intelligent leader wielding persuasive rhetoric. These were men like John Garang, who led the rebellion in southern Sudan with his Sudan People's Liberation Army. He pulled off what few guerrilla leaders anywhere have done: winning his people their own country. Thanks in part to his tenacity, South Sudan will hold a referendum next year to secede from the North. Garang died in a 2005 helicopter crash, but people still talk about him like a god. Unfortunately, the region without him looks pretty godforsaken. I traveled to southern Sudan in November to report on how ethnic militias, formed in the new power vacuum, have taken to mowing down civilians by the thousands.
I could leave and go do something else, but if I do that, I might never come back, and that thought frightens me. There is nothing that holds me here, nothing that forces me to stay, other than this blank page that needs filling. It is my choice to attempt to do that, and although I am more than willing, I still can’t come up with a subject that will interest me, let alone anyone else.
I have a bridle with the cotton reins and leather 'markers' on them. I rode on the second marker before and it was too much contact for her. She is still learning to go forward and I need to let her. Instead I rode with the inside rein on the first marker and the outside rein on the buckle or first marker depending on how much slid through my hand. I am learning to let go and trust her, as she is learning to go forward and trust me.
It would have been better
I went to the eye doctor the other day...it was interesting, bordering on expensive. I went to a different eye doctor last year, and those glasses just weren't working right. I was switching between multiple glasses every day, depending upon which situation my face was in Just so you understand the many, many personalities of those beautiful orbs in my head, I will present a day in the life of my life. I like to call it "the neurotic eye-wear shuffle"
I’m a season behind on this show, but the first season was quite good. I’ve heard it maintains its level of excellence, so more would be welcome.
My Mum is in what I call her 'cake-loving' phase at the moment. She isn't a big cake eater (weird, right?) but she will randomly have cravings for certain cakes. Of course, I'm only too happy to cater to these cravings; which is exactly what I did today. You see, for the past few days she has purposely left this magazine out on the kitchen bench on the exact same page for me to see. Finally I looked at it today and noticed it was a recipe. Go figure. She had layed it out purposely for me in the hope that I would bake it to satisfy her craving. I think that this cake-cross-slice will definitely do the job. The texture is divine; so soft and moist. And the hint of cinnamon admist the carrot and apricot is such a good combination too.
In February my husband and I will celebrate our 20th Wedding Anniversary and we have been interviewed by a national women's magazine which is writing a feature on the subject of marriage.
I walked away from the computer. I gulped. Who had I just sent that email to?
An al Qaeda media strategist wrote that Fox sucks, CNN is better, and MSNBC shouldn’t have fired Olbermann, in the greatest act of trolling ever.
I came up with it last year, while David Mack and I were in the midst of our third-season Star Trek Re-Watch for Tor.com. Since I was lacking for anything original to post here tonight, I decided to dig up that old blog posting and present the relevant bits here again, using the “ReWard” moniker that I’ll employ whenever I want to repost some past blog entry and make it appear like I’m still providing fresh, new content.
1 large carrot, minced
Her new album, “Let It Break”, has some cracking songs about the heart on it, like “Ruin” or, my favourite, the anthemic “Shock to My System“, which is just downright catchy while being effortlessly touching. A tale of a life “half alive” because of pain and disappointment and sheer bloody habit being set on fire by the arrival of a love who then simply fucks off, I find myself really touched and wondering about my own life, my own often chequered history. The best songs do that to you, I suppose.
Sarah goes to a lake house with her dad and her uncle; a big, three-floor vacation house with lots of doors that no one in the family has used in years, which in turn has made the house a target for vandalism, which in turn has resulted in the family boarding up all of the windows and securely locking any sort of point of entrance. So, you see, this is a lake house that would serve extremely well as a trap. And as Sarah is left alone to explore at first, she begins to hear some things, and when her uncle leaves for a short while, well, let’s just say the house starts serving its potential as a trap.
To me a fish is a Betta, or Siamese Fighting Fish, whichever you prefer. They are cheap, can live in a five dollar bowl with no filter or heater and are easy to take care of. It seems my husband has other ideas of what pet fish are. He starts looking at all these ridiculously expensive aquariums (we have gone past the tank straight to the aquarium). I ask him just what he is planning on putting in this aquarium and he responses "Guppies". Seriously, a fifty dollar aquarium for a couple of guppies? Then he explains that guppies breed often and in great numbers so we need the big tank. I am thinking that the last thing we need is a zillion guppies.
Then Abimelech went to Thebez, and he camped against Thebez and captured it. But there was a strong tower in the center of the city, and all the men and women with all the leaders of the city fled there and shut themselves in; and they went up on the roof of the tower. So Abimelech came to the tower and fought against it, and approached the entrance of the tower to burn it with fire. But a certain woman threw an upper millstone on Abimelech's head, crushing his skull. Then he called quickly to the young man, his armor bearer, and said to him, "Draw your sword and kill me, so that it will not be said of me, 'A woman slew him.'" So the young man pierced him through, and he died. When the men of Israel saw that Abimelech was dead, each departed to his home. Thus God repaid the wickedness of Abimelech, which he had done to his father in killing his seventy brothers. Also God returned all the wickedness of the men of Shechem on their heads, and the curse of Jotham the son of Jerubbaal came upon them.
3. Strawberries, $1.29/lb. at Sprouts (through 3/9/11)
I was reminded of a verse that i love:
I hope you're all hanging with me still. I hope you're encouraged by the mountains God has already moved for Bernadette and for Mason. I promised this family that we would not abandon them. They never reached fully funded on their first adoption journey to bring Clare and Malachi home. They made great financial sacrifices (I know, they'd rather I not share that, but it's true). They knew the money would eventually come back in the form of a tax refund, but it was still a sacrifice. The thing is the tax refund won't happen for Bernadette and Mason's adoptions. This family absolutely must be Fully Funded! I can't think of anything braver than stepping out only 4 months after arriving home to go back again. What amazing "YES" people my friends are.
MacKaye’s personification in Suggestion did not go without criticism, claiming that the Fugazi frontman had no right to sing about a woman’s experience. “That’s nonsense! It’s a human issue that we should and will continue to deal with”. The skeptics were in the minority as many felt a resounding connection with a human issue that is still problematic today where we are taught how not to be assaulted instead of not to rape (Azerrad, 2001).
Officer Stephanie Pridgen wrote that Cato had a “strong odor of alcohol emanating from his breath and clothing” and that his eyes were “bloodshot and watery.”
Of course there is basic writing tips such as plot and structure, as well as information on self-publishing, and even legal issues that can arise. (Thinking of writing a tell-all about your family? Might want to think again if they are still alive because it could be a lawsuit waiting to happen, but this book addresses the stickier issues you may not have considered.)
Learning how to do exercises without equipment is more realistic to do to make fitness a lifestyle rather than an on-and-off thing. If you only know how to workout in the gym, how will you be able to do something as awesome as this:
#80. hubby working "on the side"... so we can afford to travel
As my film discussion/review colleague, Didion of the Feminema website has just done a post on this film, and two others here, with the aim being to bring to our attention the fact that not every film is about super heroes, cops, drugs, warfare, comic books, cartoons, or sex. Some films don’t depend on a narrative plot or on dialogue. In fact, this film’s methodology is innovative and new. It crosses film with art, and art history, and that’s just the starting point. In her view this is so cutting edge that it is worthwhile to invest your time to watch these films.
It's that time of the year, when they suddenly behave more like siblings than classmates. They have spent a lot of time together and it's starting to wear on them and to be honest, me too! Listening to them argue over the littlest things is tiring and the tattling has suddenly become relentless. I hated to do it, but once again I've had to pull out....the tattle jar.
They are also solid wood. They weren’t ugly. I had hoped that we could just leave them wood and paint only the trim around them. It was all taped up pretty tightly while we did the rest of the room. But, it needed to be done. So over the course of a few days, these got taped, primed, primed again, and then two coats of white. After I painted all 6 windows shut, Dustin got them opened and proceeded to paint them all shut again himself. Luckily, they are all free now, but what a pain! We were even careful!
According to web traffic site Alexa.com, the traffic of TR Emeritus has more than doubled in the last one week since it made headlines after news of being served a lawyer’s letter by PM Lee were splashed across the Singapore papers.
Its sounding flat
7). Resurrected project: 28mm Wild West
Here we go, the disgusting song was playing and I was trying to locate those freedom fighters. Well they were there, but not doing what I thought there were going to do, Instead kicking some ass, all I saw was their ass were up on air and hip hop boys doing some things only you can imagine. Cell phone paparazzi are rolling their cameras and those three girls were in a fight to keep their skirts down.
When Legacy was put down this spring, I was angry, I was furious, I kicked and screamed at the world, completely unable to accept that this was his time. Now, I don’t feel that way. I know it was her time. She has had a good life. I am not angry. Just sad. And at the same time, I am honored to have known her. I am honored that I get to raise her wonderful foal.
I also think this post will help explain my fascination for texture and old things, for abandoned places and buildings, and for cemeteries. In the abstract I wrote for my advisor, I explained:
The end of this gruesome and psychopathic history of armed attacks and war-murders in the Orwellian names of unalienable rights and freedom will end upon the demand of enough in the 99% to arrest the obvious current War Criminals.
Free State Brewing Co. Fireside Imperial Pils
The girls from the Bistro Volnay have been murmuring tasty tidbits about their new restaurant for months now, and finally the gorgeous new place, just steps away from the maison mere has opened its doors. Les Jalles, as it's called, is an elegant and beautifully designed room with vintage lights and furniture sourced from England, plenty of dark wood and ceramic and looks more like a gentleman's club than a dining establishment. In fact, it doesn't look much like anything else in town. Open from 7h30 am for breakfast (pastries, home made jams, etc), and for lunch and dinner, it also has a speakeasy type bar upstairs festooned with Tamara de Lempicka style paintings of flapper era girls and headed by "the most incredible barman" says Magali. Look for this to be the hottest and most talked about opening for coming months.
all your hate has done
svengali Malcolm McLaren. Admittedly, Rotten had scrawled
“The only good Kraut is a dead Kraut”.
He freely admits his books’ debts to both Tolkien and Gormenghast Trilogy author Mervyn Peake. Make no mistake however Monster Blood Tattoo is no parody or pastiche, but an intricately imagined and richly drawn world with a compelling storyline. Fans were delighted to hear that Mr Cornish is well into a fourth book in the series told it seems from a much different perspective.
That miscarriage was one of the most difficult things I've ever been through. As I read that entry while sitting on the couch this morning, I looked at my 3 beautiful babies who are so uniquely wonderful and thought, "Wow, what a plan He had. Thank you Lord for your blessings."
For a 9 hole course, this is pretty challenging. Here's a few shots.
This incident is the biggest single loss of UK life at one time in Afghanistan since a Nimrod crash killed 14 service personnel in 2006.
It's been a wretched winter throughout much of the US this year. New England has been no exception. It seems that every winter I get a bit of seasonal affective disorder. This year was a bit worse. With my driveway a lost cause and everything becoming an effort as a result of the snow, I got a bit down. Hence, the lack of writing on the blog.
Veronica wakes up in hospital. She hit her head at the morgue and was taken to hospital. She had concussion. She became so distressed she had to be sedated. They keep her in for a few days under observation. The police visit her. Details emerge about Sarah’s death. She was sexually assaulted, beaten and tortured before her throat was slit. The police have no leads. Veronica is distraught when she reads a newspaper article about Sarah’s death in the hospital canteen. They release her from hospital. She gets a taxi home. The empty house upsets her. Her husband’s at work. She goes to Sarah’s room. She becomes upset. She lies on her daughter’s bed and starts crying.
-Moby Dick (447)
Our goal is to have a fun evening where a paper lantern is lit out the front of every house and business on Wray Avenue. As Fremantle’s only avenue, I believe Wray could look beautiful with decorated paper lanterns lining the sides of the street.
So what do you do to while away fourteen hours ….. you take plenty of snaps …… of the same things, over and over….
Phreak: Tons of damage?
Moving slowly
There are, of course, many reasons for this well-earned and well-deserved success of Ferrante and Teicher, not the least of which is their impeccable musicianship, so very brilliantly showcased in the lush, string filled orchestrations which have become their trademark.
Look at all that hair! I love the colours, and the white halo around her. I’m a bit confused as to what the blue thing on the right is in between the strands of her hair; it’s clear she has a blue shirt on, but does it have a giant puff at the front that protrudes all the way up to her chin? Or is that supposed to be her shoulder? Either way, it looks a tad akward. Anyways, I love Barbie stuff from the 80s and early 90s. Her hair and clothes were the best then, and also the font of the Barbie logo was much nicer than some modern versions I have seen.
If you want to know if your drama will be subbed during the live stream, go back to the iOnAir home page, and click on the SUBTITLE SCHEDULE. (Of the Wednesday-Thursday dramas, it doesn’t look like Wild Romance will be live subbed … I could be wrong, so, try it anyway.)
You can’t just “wing it” on something this big.
And swapped between, depending who was listening,
Whisk flour, sugar, salt.
I offered to do the food for one particular party a friend was hosting. Mulling over the logistics of containing and moving food for 25 I decided to make a giant chilli con carne, (the premise being- rice/mince/ lutenitza style sauce- are all more than popular.) Thinking ahead, I even made two, one hot and one not. Smugly I expected a runaway success on my hands. As I set it on the table in a ‘taddah!’ moment of glory, the more traditional Bulgarians at the party recoiled in unconcealed horror and proceed to help themselves to more salad in disgust. I think they may still be whispering about the disastrous incident in the village cafe, even today.
judge in mine own conscience may best conduce to tend to the public weal
My son's second grade teachers put on a Longhorn market every year where kids "make" a good then they get to 'buy' and 'sell' their goods to each other at the market. Honestly, I was kind of dreading this project because I knew we had to make 24 of whatever Reed's 'good' was going to be.
I also had a small problem with the ending. I don't want to reveal too much, and this is purely my opinion, but I felt like Jackson's last decision went completely against all the things he learned in the past. Again, as far as that goes, it's merely that I wasn't crazy about the direction the story took but that's what happened and I can respect it. It's not going to keep me from reading the next book in the series and I feel like with more practice under her belt, the author is really going to be able to make something special.
Several years ago, I heard the story of Larry Walters, a 33-year-old man who decided he wanted to see his neighborhood from a new perspective. He went down to the local army surplus store one morning and bought forty-five used weather balloons. That afternoon he strapped himself into a lawn chair, to which several of his friends tied the now helium-filled balloons. He took along a six-pack of beer, a peanut-butter-and-jelly sandwich, and a bb gun, figuring he could shoot the balloons one at a time when he was ready to land.
I actually have three blogs right now, with different themes, all for the sake of having a place to be required to practice. Personal journals are great, but there is nothing like public shame for a good motivator. A private journal could sit and rot for a year, and nobody would ever know. But out here, somebody might stumble across my blog and see nothing but short, infrequently updated, poorly conceived entries. There’s an immediacy in the striving, to try to vindicate my absurd claims to being a writer, and make it less absurd.
I've worn L'Instant, L'instant magique, Angélique noire and My Insolence, but I find this one to be the most "classic" of recent launches (I guess along with other Shalimar flankers).
It is important for us to be as gracious of a guests as you are when you’re the one hosting the party. When you’re invited to someone’s home for dinner or a party, it is always appropriate to bring a hostess gift - the obvious choices being flowers and wine.
The Spirit of God, who raised Jesus from death, lives in me, then He who raised Christ from death will also give life to my mortal body by the presence of His Spirit in me. God’s Spirit joins Himself to my spirit to declare that I am a child of God. Since I am a child of God, I will possess the blessings God keeps for His people, and I will also posses with Christ what God has kept for Him; for if I share Christ suffering, I will also share His Glory! Amen!
-2 FuzziBunz diapers (one one-size and one size small (was free with my purchase!))
The final festive making has finished - just need to start on my collection of January birthdays now - and I've booked a fair for the end of February too :) I finished this fairy the other day - I don't think I'll be able to part with her - she is my favourite so far;
"Our Feed the Future program -- we’ve been able to help increase productivity there," President Obama said.
What an awesome monthly Grand prize worth over $100!!
The entire month of May will be dedicated to this series and the farmers that comprise it. I won't feature any full paintings, but, rather, I'll show the works in progress and various details, talking a bit about the painting process, challenges I came across, the farmers themselves, and whatever else strikes my fancy. I'll approach this alphabetically (instead of the order in which I painted them --this blog is Random Access Murtanovski, after all), starting with Geri and John Della Bosca in my next post.
Hi there — pleased to meat you.
What is your favorite vegetable sandwich? Care to share any ideas?
In one evening of playing music we didn’t even scratch the surface of his massive collection of hard to find records. Singers like O.V.Wright and Harold Burrage will have to be saved for another day. After repeated listening to the cd he made for me, I learned more than a few things. Johnny Sayles has Soul. Bobby Moore has Soul. Freddie Scott has Soul. Peter Greenberg has Soul.
All day Sunday, we talk about how pumped we are for “pizza night!”
We've got a few more big events and then school will be over before we know it. And then I will start my next adventure: work toward earning my Doctorate in Music Education from Kansas State University. I'm excited and scared all at the same time!
Any other suggestions gratefully received. After all, there’s still 119 spaces to fill – and that’s just today!
#14 1978 Kenny Schmidt EP Austin 880 Yards 1:52.0
Well, it is and it isn't. Let me explain.
Infuse you with the warmth of a bubbled bath
So those were my fave from last year. .. it is nice to look back onto last year's card, had forgotten most of them!
Throughout those final two weeks of run-throughs and “fix it” sessions I did at least have the pleasure of a constant companion. One that stayed by my side by day and by night. One that helped me keep track of the days and the hours flying by. A faithful friend who never let me down. My trusty purple notebook.
Donations over £25 will receive a quarter-page advert in the event programme (if they wish and the group advertises abides by the ideals of the conference - you will be offered a refund if your advert is considered unsuitable).
Of course, once I decided to do this, Indigo started a Buy 3 Get One Free sale. Damn them.
When it’s raw, you can easily blend it into little pieces (almost like rice. You can actually eat this like rice, more information about this later).
Maybe you really believe that it never will or that there still will be enough leafy glades and white avenue ghettos to outlast your grandchildren, provided that is they can cope with the commute.
High tenacity rotor wing.
March 07 The Echo, Los Angeles CA
mAh—Millamp A long time. This can be explaining the exact amount of your a battery can retailer at one time. Having a increased mAh rating, a battery can electricity a tool that needs a lot more electricity or electricity a tool much longer of your time.
One thing that disturbed me was the fact that while her attitude about getting rid of her virginity was something I've seen before when I was a teen, so it was realistically shown, it was more the fact that she ended up treating sex so casually and how she wasn't sad that she'd given it away to a guy she didn't even like was a bit difficult for me to digest. Yes, the scene felt realistic. Her heart wasn't in it and thus "getting laid" wasn't that big of a deal because for her it was a means to an end. Most of the time when girls do agree to have sex for the first time it's because they have feelings for the guy. I guess it bugged me that in her heart she treated her purity like it didn't mean much. I would have liked to see her realizing that she should have waited for someone she loved. Or had some regrets and not told people she was "fine" afterward. If the author intended to show some remorse, I wasn't feeling it.
i guess when i get down to it - my main issue with the week is that it's been so crazy and off-kilter that i worry it is really me that is crazy and off-kilter. know that feeling? it's sort of that feeling that if you can't find the drunk at the party - it's probably you. right?
Patience is a huge key, as is mind over matter.
Farred could not hide his intense dislike for the lacrosse players. He denounced—without citing any evidence—“the lacrosse team’s reputed tendency toward arrogant sexual prowess.” (Imagine the appropriate outrage if a professor had made such a generic claim about, say, his African-American students.) He asserted that the team had a “criminal history.” (Yes, according to the Coleman Committee report: the same “criminal history” of hundreds of other Duke students who had alcohol-related violations.)
“I don’t think our church is the only true and living church,” I rambled. “Not to say there isn’t a lot of good in it, or that there isn’t truth in it, or that it can’t bring a person closer to God. I mean, I think it can do that, but I don’t think it has a corner on light and knowledge. In fact, I’m not sure I even believe in a ‘one true church.’”
Apparently there's a new Blogger format out there and apparently I have NO IDEA on this earth or any of the others that make up this ten dimensional universe how to navigate it. I was lost, abandoned, chewing the souls of my shoes for nourishment as I scavenged a beach of broken food blogger dreams!
Education is not the answer when high value-added, high wage manufacturing and professional service jobs, such as software engineering, are moved offshore in order to enhance short-term profits for shareholders and multi-million dollar bonuses for CEOs, while domestic employment and purchasing power are destroyed. Unless American university graduates can emigrate to China and India, there is no one to employ them. Yet, we still hear the call to run up student loan debts beyond the ability of salaries to repay the loans.
I've now crossed off most things on my 26 things to do before turning 26 list (which also turned into my before 27 list). And so, a new list for this new year of life...couldn't quite get to 28 but I'm sure I will think of more as the year goes on:
“It’s a much simplified, feasible way of causing regeneration; very easy to use as therapy,” Dzau said. “With stem cells, you have to take them from the embryo or tissue in the body, grow them in culture, and re-inject them—and then there can be technical and biological problems.
Bypasses kill cities in two ways. They can simply remove any reason to slow down or stop at all, so that every customer just goes flying by, and all the commerce goes to another city. Or they can move the crossroads away from the old downtown to a new place on the outskirts, which becomes the new downtown (if you can call it that).
so as I already said before I looove vintage! and it feels so great when you find something that is beautiful and cheap! vintage bags are double the fun..they are real leather they are stylish and cheap!!! here are my two very different style vintage bags..
Yesterday I was asked one of my team members to make a flyer. My mind instantly resisted and I physically felt the trust leave my body as tightness in my belly. Upon recognizing this physical sensation, I took a deep breath, TRUSTED and opened up “Pages” on my sexy little macbook pro and make a freakin’ flyer. And guess what.. if you ask me, it freakin’ rocks.
It is not art: it’s cruel madness.
The highway drops her line
You cannot make a reality out of wishful thinking.
I just learned of the unexpected passing of a dear friend of mine.
and I'm very happy to have this copy in my collection with
and she loves me to this day
in World Book Night editions. Givers apply for a particular book (they get a first, second and third choice) which they must commit to gift to those who don't regularly read, to share and spread their love of reading. Givers collect their books from their local bookshops and libraries, putting the very heart of our reading communities at the very heart of World Book Night.
(This is mostly for me to always remember so I won't be offended if you don't read this!)
My instrumental action (to seek shelter) is based on the fundamental recognition of certain universal laws which, through pattern recognition, human logic, etc. has ensured that my survival chances (as a Westerner) are much higher than that of the Noble Savage, whose historical cognizance of instrumental actions, that have proven themselves to be very successful, is very limited. An example; Thabo Mbeki’s refusal to acknowledge that AIDS/HIV is caused by a virus and his Health Minister’s advice to rather eat beetroot than take anti-virals, have definitely lessened the survival chances of their affected countrymen – a 1000 of whom die per day of this dreaded disease. So, in terms of instrumental actions (as demanded by rational behaviour) I can, with absolute certainty say, that my rationality is ‘better’ than that of the Noble Savage – simply because my survival chances are greater.
Now lets analyze this..I am 24 weeks pregnant, have gained 20 pounds in weight(not too crazy but little crazy ) and my OB doc is going to think I gained 27 lbs. So here I am freaking out and wondering how I am going to loose at least 3 pounds before I get back to my OB doc in a week so she doesn't see how much I have gained Whew!!! That was long and tough to write and probably sounds crazy to you but trust me it is such a mind F&*K to gain weight and see the scale creep up after you have fought for so long to take it off.
Article 35: If the copyright administrative management entity decides to mete out punishment, it should formulate an administrative punishment resolution.
#6 Couple tee.
Hey, everybody! :)
I also have some other surprises JUST for you in my newsletter.. so make sure you check it out later ;-)
Why People Suck Harder Than One Art Supply Store
Black Widow, a very talented spy, peak human reflex and good in martial arts (of course). None of the human have infinite energy to fight the evil, so do Black Widow and Captain America. Able to see how incredible is Black Widow definitely make my day lol, the way she bully some soldiers and pawn Hawkeye.
Mildred Hosler
The classical findings are of a fever which is followed after a few days with small blister lesions on the palms of the hands and soles of the feet. They can also occur in other areas, but hands and feet are most common. The mouth is affected too with these blister lesions, and when they burst the raw surface produces a shallow ulcer that is very painful but heals well without any long term consequence.
Pres. Bush’s new energy policy mandating minimum levels of annual biofuel production is likely to have unintended consequences on the price of beef.
Scripture reveals what he was before he was saved, but that is not the main point of the account.
So since I am starting this challenge late on this fine Wednesday, I'll leave it open till next Thursday till midnight PST. BUT since I want to continue to have contests on Tuesdays, I'll still be putting up a new challenge next Tuesday. Promise this time! :D (Oh and I haven't forgotten about the prizes- I'll be writing those features and putting up those buttons of winners tonight! :D And Tiffany- I still owe you your prize! I'll hit you up on fb :))
The last three times I have seen her, she has asked about the Spouse Sparrow. By name. And then she blushed.
We all want to know the answer to that question. The facts are the facts. There were more erasures on our kids’ test papers than on the papers of other kids.
is going to grab him? REALLY? — Bewildered Brooklynite
BN stepped up their game by stooping into the level of sewer politics against PR leaders, especially Anwar Ibrahim, who has been the target of many vicious attacks. It was alleged BN saw fit to implicate him in one sex scandal after another in their efforts, to topple him and finish off his political career in order to wreck PR’s chances in the coming 13th General Election.
9)If you tweet about this giveaway you get one extra entry and this can be done once a day for an extra entry! Make sure to include a link to the giveaway as well as @thegiveawaydiva
Though my love for books has remained unchanged all these years, the world of books is changing. E-books are gaining popularity and I’m considering the many pluses of carrying hundreds of books on one device. I like the idea of downloading a book I want to read instantly. However, my growing need seems disloyal to the brick and mortar bookstores and to the Australian publishing industry who are trying so hard to survive. It is very much an adapt or die time for them.
Wednesday will feature the world premiere of the music video as well as a live acoustic performance from MLSF. Tickets at $5.00 at the door. The music video will debut online as soon as the world premiere has finished.
8. MOCK UP AS MUCH AS YOU CAN TO ILLUSTRATE THE IDEA. Here are two pages from a book I pitched to a publisher several years ago. You don't even need to use final text. Just throw some jabberwocky copy in. It's the 'look' they're interested in. I use InDesign, but you can use any medium.
Literally, we cannot describe the history of life on this planet without using these mass die-offs as a yardstick. So what caused them all?
This book has a new character, Maggie the Glasgow fox, who has a rather capacious handbag!
Not enough was it that Sam had bottled some of her Cherry Bomb Porter especially for the night, but each guest was supplied with a Cherry Ripe chocky to enjoy with the beer. And, in an impromptu in-house auction, Sam managed to sever $22 from an eager punter in return for the half eaten sample that had inspired the brew in the first place. Half eaten and sat on.
WINE EDUCATION: A BS in Environmental Chemistry and getting my hands dirty in my family’s vineyard
in each other
The Shadow by Shelley Munro (PA)
Of course businesses are free to adopt their own policies to encourage and reward innovation and many have done so with the assistance of their IP strategy advisers. Its possible though, that without obligatory guidelines on remuneration as in Germany, board members may find it difficult to authorise modest payments to inventors at an early stage. The current mood of the country against the bonus culture, certainly assists here.
Sail through the air of June.
The Bersih rally for free and fair elections was “peaceful” and “festive”, international observers said today, adding that those who turned up were “challenging the shadow of fear.”
1. A former bedroom, now the sitting room, opens to the courtyard via new French doors.
A book and a series of films based on the events described by the Lutzes followed.
And stood. And stood some more. After about 7 minutes we moved. ONE SINGLE STEP. It was hysterical. We stood some more. We started to walk slowly. After a block (?) or so space opened up a little and people started to jog. I remember thinking “Why run? We got a lot of miles to go, let’s just walk to the start”. Totally cracking up about this now.
Performing Prose offers over 200 pages and 10 chapters (plus one lovely grammar appendix) of discussions on style, technique, and more, but the strongest techniques that they weave into their style is strong use of footing, creating a comfortable atmosphere for the reader; an effective use of tropes and schemes, particularly the analogy; and artfully jumping between the ideas of convention and deviation.
4. Heat the oil in a cast iron pan and place the fish in it once the oil is very hot.
You don't think so? Well, he's very softly spoken. We've been friends for almost 50 years you know. He looks after me. Nathan picked up the beers and returned to the table.
I can't believe that my second Blogeversary is here and I would like to take the opportunity to say Thank You for your support,your friendship and for taking the time to leave me your lovely comments.I got so spoiled this year so it is time to give at least something back .Here is what you can win.
Once we got to the campground, I aked Lynda take the dogs and leave me for an hour. I cleaned as best I could, wiping surfaces and vacuuming up the Chicken Dust. But I knew it would take much more effort than that to get the Trek properly cleaned up.
“As a fag at school, if I misfielded a ball I was put at the wicket and bowled at with no bat to protect me, and woe betide me if I shirked the ordeal. A little of this discipline might do good now.”
So check those moles frequently and slather on the sunblock!! I'm a practice-what-I-preacher now!
Harman was recorded saying she would “waddle into” the AIPAC case “if you think it’ll make a difference,” according to two former senior national security officials familiar with the NSA transcript.
5 3/4″ Ice Cream Shift – High Speed, Max Pressure, Multi Cut for Felt.
Backstory: The Joseph brothers came to this country from their native Haiti and have been business and property owners for over 26 years. Two weeks ago, they were informed that their building on South Oxford Street in Fort Greene, Brooklyn could not legally house their business - F + S Tire Shop. While tires were changed on the South Oxford corner (for nearly three decades), the brownstone neighborhood has improved around F + S. Crime has been pushed out, and the downtown Brooklyn location is once again prime real estate.
It was revealed in court that requests for information from Mr Wight appeared in Mr Whitamore’s records 70 times.
Yay, I am officially a gym member (again)! I joined today and did a 35 minute work out–I have to ease into, so I was going to do 30 minutes, but wanted to see if I could handle the elliptical yet so I gave myself the challenge to do a little more than my plan (told you I was competitive!). So, I beat both my goals: joining by May, 30 minute workout!
And of course full of granny goodness...
“I actually stayed in the home the whole time,” he said. “I definitely did not pursue him.”
Not only did scientists find they could make the mice ‘resistant to obesity’ but the study showed they could treat many of the other aspects of abnormal metabolism such as the struggle to lower cholesterol and improve glucose handling in these animals.
Mardi Gras celebrations are known for extravagant parties, parades, beads, mayhem – and masks, liberating revelers to anonymously partake in the day’s festivities. Figurative masks, however, in everyday life can severely impair our sense of emotional wellness.
Yesterday, our Meatless Monday meal was delicious. So good, in fact, my arm hurts from patting myself on the back.
But, at the same time, I'm quite aware of the complexities of aid. I believe, for example, that giving money to corrupt governments only makes governments more corrupt, and actually ends up worse for the people in the country. I think most charitable giving should be through NGOs that train people how to care for themselves.
I’ve already been in Djelibeybi a few days.
Believe it or not, Keane started by mimicking cartoons in The New Yorker, a magazine that would never touch The Family Circus.
You heard me.
I'm just paying my rent every day
While the riots now spreading across London started in many cases along racial lines, most of the looting has fanned out into a flash response from the underclass to lash out against business and snatch-and-grab consumerist goods. At the same time, UK reporter Patrick Henningson was among those who witnessed the brutal violence being carried out on the streets. While he was barricaded inside a local pub, he saw racial beatings carried out by groups of what he described as Afro-Caribbean black youths targeting whites. Meanwhile, the authorities in London are preparing to implement a martial law crackdown on the riots, putting in place greater restrictions on liberties as a preplanned "response."
Teaching yourself how to get to a better place,
FG: To be perfectly honest, I new some from my early school years but not a lot of details. So I started reading, and I mean reading, everything I could get my hands on about the war and the people who fought in it. However, it was nothing like what I learned actually shooting the film. Here I am, in my first big film, playing a General, leading a cavalry charge with swords drawn. It was a childhood fantasy come true and the greatest history lesson all wrapped up in one. Again, I feel very blessed.
I don't smoke anymore and I have been working a desk job for two years. I eat like a Farm Hand. I have gained about 40 pounds.
1 objection
We even had a little time to horse around before the first finishers came across the line. Kerri and I were both supposed to run the half marathon and both of us had to drop out. We were not going to leave until we had an action shot of crossing the finish line. Yes, people thought we were nuts. Eh...I figured I just paid $80 bucks for that picture.
This unit was one that I picked up from BuRock after he got it from a huge eBay lot. Thankfully he was quite nice to me and gave them to for quite cheap.
He somehow climbs up to the top of that structure and then makes a beeline straight to the brick chimney on the side of the school. Now if you ever noticed the chimney of PS 130 it has these insets that almost look like steps. They are about one or two feet away from each other and go all the way up to the top. So Shawn gently places the toe stop of his skates on each step, and wraps his arms around the side of the bricks and starts to slowly scale his way up.
But in a memo sent to Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, published by the White House, the president said it was appropriate to release funds to the authority, which administers the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
I think that mathematics, computer science and engineering are much safer fields for Christians to study. My background is in computer science, and I have an undergraduate and graduate degree in that area. These areas are safer because it is much harder for the professors to inject politics into the curriculum, so that students don’t have to be forced to accept things on faith, without any critical thinking or debate. Math features answers that are right or wrong regardless of politics, and programming features programs that either run or not, regardless of religion.
There's that "levure" stuff, but I've barely the time to make cookies, let alone test-run them, so I couldn't be sure that would work. I had a rep to live up to here, and wasn't prepared to risk it after so many successful batches. (Just takes one to earn your "crappy cook" label, and my chances for redemption were nil.)
Inside Style by Annmarie O'Connor - as featured in The Dubliner - Feb 10th
Thou art the image of God who dwells in darkness of Africa,
at unusual minutes she pauses
Ég anda (6:15)
yet still I'm a cyborg just like you,
#whydotherestofusactlikesheep?
annoying her
It's a slow fade when you give yourself away
to a miracle?”
Natalie Standiford is one of my absolute favorite authors and so I knew that I wanted to read this as soon as possible. And while yes, there are some mysteries involved, this is really a story about growing up and how hard that is.
The conference is organized by the Homeschooling Association of the Philippine Islands (HAPI), an organization that has dedicated itself as a catalyst for nation-building by advancing home education and unifying home educators in the country.
When I first awoke, the world was quiet. Now, it’s starting to wake up. I hear the early birds. Our chickens are starting to talk to each other, but they’ve not come out into the run. I hear a vehicle pulling the nearby hill. The deer are on the move.
Well this mainly relates to point two and three. On Saturday March 16th, 2012, I decided to accompany my mother and grandpa to an old cousin funeral to pay my respects. For me, the funeral was kinda of surprising because
next up...ava's 1st birthday party!
Hiding at desk.
A bright child isn't a smarter child; it's a child whose eyes are sparkling with enthusiasm for the world around them.
Kenya army spokesman Major Emmanuel Chirchir said the rallies were a “forced demonstration.”
So for the first 5 people (and their blogs in no particular order, trust me) I am nominating for the Award:
Row 5- ch1, turn, sc in ea sc and ch sp (15)
To think of ourselves as unchanging and permanent is a misconception in the same way as thinking a wave, a table, a mountain or a star is. We only appear to be an object because of the timescale in which we view ourselves. But we are a process as much as a wave or a flame. The cells of our bodies are constantly dying off and renewing. It is reckoned 98% of our cells are replaced at least every year.
August 4, 1961, Stanley Ann Dunham (SAD1) was residing with SAD and Madelyn Dunham (MD) when Barack Hussein Obama (BHO) was born.
We've run classes in pouring down freezing rain, snow, and sweltering heat in the last couple of months, and while I've seen guys so miserably cold they couldn't stop shivering (we DO monitor for onset of cold-weather casualties), we've only had one man have to quit in the middle of a class, due to blowing out his knee during dynamic movement drills (wear your kneepads guys, and don't be afraid to slow the fuck down to avoid getting hurt).
I am excited for the adventure...
I'm sure I will have more to say on this. I am overwhelmed with it all right now.
400 gram old ginger ( skin on and dented )
And He looked at it, touched it, and fixed it… Without hesitating.
He has got to tuck his butt in when he dances – he sticks it out and it makes his posture so weird. But he really brought the character and he does try so hard.
I don't have anymore weddings to go to until 2011. I'm gonna miss them kinda.
Alona?
The Little Drummer Boy ... ABC Family ... 7 AM
And the Winner of Bling from last week's Featured Artist comments is...........
4 oz. bittersweet or semi-sweet chocolate
Tim headed into town to get some light bulbs and bits and pieces for the van. I stuck the kids in front of the DVD player, made myself a coffee and wrote yesterdays blog entry and went through the photos i took of the gorge.
Tiny footprints disappear
Well I am certainly glad to hear you say that. It appears to me the only real difference from your view and ours, in this area anyway, is where the holy ones will be located when they rule. Since they will be like Christ and with Christ, who is now a life giving spirit, it seems the difference doesn’t amount to much. There are then two destinies or assignments for Christians. One sector, the holy ones, will rule over, judge and perform priestly activities for those of the second resurrection, who will live on earth as humans. At this point then, I am not sure what the real contention is. Would it bother me if the holy ones ruled from earth? No. I just don’t see the Biblical evidence to be in support of that but rather to the contrary. But, from your own words, it appears there are two destinies for Christians, differentiated by either the first resurrection or the “second”.
There are tasting notes on the form so you know what the beer will be like for your naming process and this makes for a fun game with a group of friends. Easy enough to come up with a name you may think but we sat there for a long time thinking and then checking the names we came up with weren’t already being used by another brewery. Guess that is the problem with being a beer drinker, still we came up with a couple of ideas. So whilst any reader who does do this I wish them all the best but I’m sure my name is the winner. ;)
When my brain caught up and I realized what I had done, I decided to throw it all together and make a creamy chicken noodle soup. I hate wasted effort almost as much as I hate wasted ingredients. The results were wonderful, and per my future son-in-law's request, I wrote everything down so I could make it exactly the same way the next time. ;o)
Nursing to sleep. Does anyone else pretty much HAVE to nurse their child to sleep?? Turtle-Love refuses to sleep for me without the boobie. He was refusing to sleep without me holding him, but we are working on that and doing pretty well. I'm thinking that was just a phase. However, nursing to sleep does NOT seem to be a phase. It doesn't matter how tired he is - he will NOT go to sleep with out the boobie. Unless I'm not home. Not just in the other room, but actually gone. Then apparently he will go to sleep. And SOMETIMES in his car seat, if he is stuffed to the gills.
'Shadowboxes' by Vanessa Blakeslee
We were in Toys R' Us yesterday looking for the Imaginex Spinning octopus and Dragon boat accessories for The Pirate ship and Dragon Castle that Mum bought Jake and Fin. We found the Aisle and there are 2 women with 2 or 3 kids there debating over some of these imaginex things. They were blocking our way so we were looking from where we were to see the octo and the dragons and either me or mum spotted the octo and said "oh theres the Octopus" and pointed. the Blond bimbo mums look at me and do not move. Clearly there was competition there. The shelves were pretty bare, and the big sets were on sale so I believe it had been fairly picked over. The women didn't move, just looked at me.
Since then, the number has been steadily growing and as recently as just before the wedding, I discovered I was starting to get a concentration of them at the right and left of the top of my forehead. If my hair were black, it would be very Addams Family. I decided I liked it. Still, it came as something of a shock to find what can best be described as a stripe of grey/white in my hair when I pulled the front back this morning.
Two years ago, I wrote this: Houston is always, always changing. As my friend Laura said, (borrowing from that genius Joni Mitchell), "they paved Paradise and put up a parking lot." If Houston is about anything, it is about the future. It is about constant construction and the need to widen yet another freeway. Every year, new places spring up while others are torn down. Yes, I know this happens everywhere . . . but in Houston it seems to happen in double-time. In the past year or two, Upper Kirby, where I used to play tennis, has been turned into a block of high-rises.
Whew!!
My professional expertise is in literary analysis not law, but I do not expect Chevron and Gulf would have much luck barring other oil companies from using “gas station” on the grounds that Chevron and Gulf were the first to open ones. The term is used too generically now. Of course Marvel and DC can’t control generic use of “superhero” either. Other companies can call their characters “superheroes” within a text, just not in a title or an advertisement.
The point being, if you’re an in-house marketer, it’s important to know where these missed opportunities exist companywide, and to secure wins with minimal efforts that integrate seamlessly into the activities these employees are already performing.
Proper Job - (IPA)
01. Dj Intro
Sharp-eyed staff recognised the distinctive trainers he'd been wearing and called police.
This should be a fairly short post as it’s solely on the letter ‘V’ (one of the most excellent of letters, I’m sure you’ll agree…) and I only have seven ‘V’ songs in total.
Millions of girls freak out when they see even a little bit of cellulite or belly fat. And they resort to extreme measures just to keep up with the standards – diet pills, excessive exercising, self-starvation.
3. While on a walk or run, why not take it from the natural instincts of a child and take to skipping whenever you can.
A Little Background: Some More Considerations
The transformation of China in recent years has been simply spectacular. Credit for the country’s outstanding achievement first goes to its visionary leader Deng Xiaoping, who started the well-known ‘reform process’. It is said that although Xiaoping had long espoused that China needed to shed its isolationist philosophy, it was after his meeting with Lee Kuan Yew, the father of modern Singapore in 1978, that he decided to cross the Rubicon.
It's terrible, tragic and ironic, but it also makes sense - in a weird, double-agent-ironic way - that this small, understated story of remembering and loss should be on the verge of falling into the vacuum. The story is, after all, an extended meditation on nostalgia, grieving and renewal. It's about preserving yourself against the abyss; carving a space of light in a world where all seems dark. When Tom Birkin (Colin Firth) arrives in the tiny Yorkshire hamlet of Oxgodsby, he suffers from a stammer, a facial tic and terrible nightmares. He's also freshly divorced and still pining for his ex-wife, Vinnie (never shown on screen). He arrives in Oxgodsby in rainy twilight and makes his way to a gloomy church. His job for the coming summer months is to restore a decrepit, hidden 14th-century fresco from the church's ancient walls.
Hamish goes to Glasgow!
Wide fields of asphodel fore’er,
we decided to pay for our own drinks!
Bottom line: Capitalism is not racist, nor is the defense of capitalism racist. Conservatives needn’t be ashamed of offering the world a job instead of a government handout.
I made the pate sucree two weeks before and I kept it safe in the freezer, thawed and baked just when I need it, a great time saver since the dough needs to be rested for a few hours after making and after rolling. The lemon cream is also pretty straight forward, you will need to whisk it constantly for about 10-15 minutes to prevent the eggs from curdling. After that, the blending of the butter that will make the curd the velvetiest and the smoothest cream ever.
Whilst staying on top of matters, it trains you to not to let things linger and miss out on opportunities.
"But I don't have any creamer," I whine.
I know that I am not perfect. I know my writing is FAR from perfect. I KNOW that I have stories to tell. I won't let fear put a damper on my dreams of sharing my stories with others. I can't. I won't. But it is a struggle. One that I will constantly battle. But for now, I will close my eyes and take a leap of faith.
I used to have blocks of time for reading as a student, but that’s not so much the case anymore, except on holidays and weekends. Still, I’m determined to catch up. Reading is a great way to spend time. It engages the brain much more than the average TV show, requiring concentration and an active mind. So, a little while ago I decided to make reading a part of my daily practice. If I wait around for holidays to get through my growing piles of books I’ll never catch up, but if I just start chipping away bit by bit each day, say just 10-20 pages daily, then I’ll be able to read 1-2 books per month at least.
Sew or iron your bottom and side hems. Leave the top un-hemmed as this is where it will be attached to the mounting board.
feel like i child.
Most, however, are kindly presences, recognising the fears we all feel in the face of illness or death, and are offering comfort.
I was on the Foreign Bar last night. I’ve never worked on it before, but it makes sense, as I can read the labels on the German beers. Pouring the draught beers by air pressure takes a bit of getting used to. You have to be careful with it or there’s foam everywhere. It’s worth the time and effort though, to get some proper lager with a nice head on it.
Though they don’t appear to irritate the baby, the drops do blur a baby’s vision. This can be a bummer, as they’re given during the period immediately following birth when newborns are otherwise alert and able to connect with parents. If you want, you can ask nurses to postpone the drops until you have had a few minutes to look into each other’s eyes. Depending on how cooperative your nurse is, you may get a little time.
Psychedelics or hallucinogens are mind-altering drugs capable of inducing distorted perceptions of thought, often including intense sensual input with diminished control of the induced experience. The experiences are commonly known as daydreams, hallucinations, and fantasies. These drugs have profound benefits based on research findings in the treatment of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), alcoholism, cluster headaches, depression, and anxiety in dying patients.
I created a search method called valExists() in our SelectManyObj to simulate PHP array search function which cannot be called directly on a PHP ArrayObject. By creating this object method we can save some coding. This code will be called 12 times in this HTML document (four interests and eight committees). The method looks like this:
BOOOOORING.
Author: Daniel Radosh
Their linky rules are as follows:
It is all to do with the singing lessons. And with a certain gullibility on Delia's part. She has fallen first of all for Mr Plummer's line that she has a gem of a voice, an un-cut diamond which he can cut and polish if Delia will only place herself in his hands. In fact Delia Greenaway's voice is nothing special. Pleasant enough but it can only become special if you consider the rest of her: the face, the dazzling hair, and of course that womanly shape. (For Oswald Plummer it is Delia's bottom that is of especial interest — as evidenced by the fact that his hand is at present handling it — but we will come to that.)
A riddle of love I give to thee
If you noticed the beaches and canyons and creeks look pretty good today, there's a reason: today was the creek-to-bay cleanup, and an army of volunteers was out this morning, making them look good. Did you volunteer? Why the heck not? It was actually a lot of fun! It was also a pretty good feeling to contribute the conservation of Marian Bear which is a canyon that I run in all the time.
December 22
The Brazilian government has also failed to resolve differences with Fifa over cut-price tickets for students and senior citizens, and demands for sponsors of the World Cup to have their trademarks protected.
RR—Well, we always want answers in terms of something we can nail down, something we can identify or relate to our concepts of ourselves. But what we are may be much more profound than what we imagine it to be. And I think that’s definitely the case. I think that the reason that I’m interested in the parapolitical aspect—if we can have a culture that’s based on scientific materialism, well, what if we had a culture that was based on weird shit?
Ro Bruhn Visiting blogs and web sites and reading art books helps, but sometimes just walking into my studio and starting to clean up the mess gets me going off on a tangent and 'forget the mess' it can wait.
It is even more amazing to me to think about this little boy...what is he doing right now? He has no idea what is happening. He has absolutely no clue what we are doing to bring him home to us. No one has told him and he likely wouldn't understand anyway. He just lives his life, one day at a time, losing weight, trying to walk in spite of rickets and scurvy, his eyesight growing a little worse with each day, and believing that his life will always be this way. He has never known anything else. Yet, here we sit, waiting on a document, hoping for some news, praying for things to move as we hope they will...and he doesn't know a thing.
Most people driving around Stuart only see the top side of the bridge from US1. It does not look like too many people venture underneath on any given day. A few walkers and some folks fishing. The rest are missing out on a concrete and steel wonder.
Following on from a somewhat personal post yesterday, I’d like to confess that I’ve got skeletons in my cupboard. We all do if we are being honest with ourselves. There is an old man who was crucified with Christ and his skeleton is still in my cupboard.
All my kisses,
The airport's chief fire officer has resigned, apparently because of the lack of training provided for his staff.
It seems like yesterday
I know why all the neighbors
It was so good to get home again. Only thing is a couple of days later I ended up back in emergency with a massive blood clot in my leg so spent 3 more days in hospital for them to get me on blood thinners. It has been a long haul but thanks be to God I am doing extremely well and slowly getting my strength back.
Also if he wishes to be president then he must have the courage to defend himself and his colleagues against outside forces like stupid conservative religously obsessed groups especially when their against the humanrights of a colleague !
And then, I got a little drawer organizer, which is really just a serving tray I picked up for a dollar. In this, I have my highlighters, my professional cards to hand out, and also my recess whistle and key for the kiln room. Both things I do not want to lose! Since this project was completed, it has definitely made my life easier and the system is working, which is a good sign!
Now I have red spots on my piece of paper and a sleeping man with a Sigma scarred across his bloodied forehead, chained helplessly to a pipe in the basement. He might not be able to seize the day, but he can sure seize the pipe. He has nothing but time to think about what I was trying to say. He didn’t understand Calculus, so he got common sense instead. It is a learning experience. When I finally do let him go, his grades are bound to get better.
It is true that his vast wealth and extravagant spending do not always make for comfortable reading. However, other aesthetes such as Stephen Tennant and Lord Berners are viewed as merely eccentric and somehow endearing for their indulgences – and there is no reason why Jeffress should not be seen in a similar light.
“We see the devastation that happens when you pass up capital improvements,” declared Sliwa, papering over decades of urban redevelopment and sounding like, well, the talk-show host he is.
The ride to the hotel sucked for obvious reasons, as did the walk from the parking garage to the hotel room. I'm sure I looked like total hell and like someone fresh of a bender or something. Chris made me get up and walk around the room every hour or so, and oh my god. I don't know exactly what caused it, but Trish said she had it too, so it must be normal, but there was this burning sensation that was beyond excruciating. It wasn't at the site of the incision, but off to the side. I have no idea what it was, but I still feel it occasionally, and it's the most painful part. I kept taking two Percocet every few hours until I passed out for the night.
Laura Marlin is the archetypal orphan sent to live in St Ives with her mysterious uncle. In this story they win a Caribbean cruise and by various plot twists Laura, her friend Tariq and her beloved husky Skye end up aboard the Ocean Empress where they team up with the annoying Jimmy Gannet. The children face real dangers on their voyage and it is their own courage and resourcefulness that saves the day and the lives of lots of rare sea creatures. Children will love and treasure these books as the series progresses.
Titanic. Debster's been unfairly victimized here, but I sense there's more to the story. Work for an investigative journalist perhaps?
So to answer your other question, the stories happen on the page. As I draw, as I write, the stories come to life. Although I do consider myself an illustrator more than a writer.
As if those figures aren’t daunting enough, 2010 showed a 49% success rate of Daubert challenges to expert witnesses of all types, either in whole or part. The good news, if there is any, is that the percentage of successful challenges remained fairly stable over the first decade of 2000.
A while back, one of my so call "friends" on Facebook called me a "paranoid asshole" (or something like that) behind my back because of some of the songs I would not allow to be embedded. (If you don't know what embedded means, don't ask me; trust me.) Evidently he believes that the music should be shared for free and artists have no rights to complain if they're used without permission. Actually, I disagree. He has done books of cartoons portraying people from New Orleans and how we talk. Ironically, he sold them......for money!!!! I am not sure how he would feel if someone copied the books and gave them away for free, especially when they were just published!
I mean I know it's classed as something that you can safely eat without any harm incurred, but that's only because it's classed as non-toxic. The glitters are actually suggested as only for use as decoration. I can't find one example of an edible glitter that doesn't actually have 'only for decoration purposes' in small print. If you want a truly edible glitter that is completely water soluble and for specific consumption you need to buy 'flakes' - which aren't nearly as sparkly and 'WOW' but are, actually supposed to be eaten. Here's what some of the websites say:
Suffice to say he was the beauty of this sacred mountain.
I am delighted to provide this sneak peak at my friend Kam Mak's Lunar New Year postal stamp which he has designed for The Year of the Dragon. To find more information about Kam and the history of the Lunar New Year stamp which he has been commissioned to design up through 2019, click HERE.
pray continually
Because of this, Shannon has to peer out from behind the dumpster in order to see where they are. As she sneaks a peak from her location, she manages to see one of her pursuers. Seeing him, Shannon quickly ducks back to her hidey-hole. From what she can tell, only one of them is coming her way. This means that she has to only worry about one person at the moment. This makes it easier for Shannon because she only needs to fend off one person when she makes her move. She can worry about the other person later.
And I will pummel him.
stitched onto 28ct aged linen using one cotton thread in Cinnamon & Sage
Heavy Pants 10 reps 15 lbs. 16 reps 20 lbs.
I had to check this. This first words are:
Is this because, officially at least, we have no record of a serial killer operating in Ireland?
While the spaghetti is cooking put 2 tablespoons of the olive oil in a pan, over medium heat. Cook the bacon crumbles until they're fairly crisp - about 3-4 minutes. Add the garlic and cook another minute.
1 checklist.
Alona and Will are such good friends
this is the smile
Delfino Aboveboard 1:54:601
why would you ask?
My job is constantly putting out fires. Correcting mishaps. Teaching and reteaching. And picking up, clearing out clutter. Go to bed. Repeat. I used to wonder what stay at home moms actually did. I figured they had a 'cupcake' life. How nice. An idyllic thought. And when I was working full-time and traveling to exotic places like Minneapolis and Green Bay, it seemed a lovely thought to be at home with kids some day.
Dear Market Wines,
the terrible pact that ensured the United States’ financial
ON ALL AVAILABLE DATA THERE IS NO DESTRUCTIVE TSUNAMI THREAT TO
"I welcome you to needle and thREAD. What have you been sewing lately? Or are you embroidering? Pulling a needle with thread through lovely fabric to make life more beautiful somehow? Would you share with us just a single photo (or more) and a description of what you're up to? Would you talk sewing and books with us? I'd love that so much."
When you exit the other side, your ears pop and you feel funny. It looks like you've just stepped back into your mama's womb. It's a bit disorienting, and if you think of it as your mother's womb, it's a little gross.
- 1 c. of apricot jam
“Dr. Borden?”
That’s a partial solution at best. In the future, smart retailers will be more transparent about their data-gathering efforts and use the results more appropriately. They’ll give customers more options for controlling how much they share and how that information gets applied. Regardless of who gathered it, customers still see it as their data. They expect to be treated like the owners.
The reason people laugh at Ma and Pa in the movies is because they are pure yokel. We laugh at their ignorance and naïveté, but never at who they are as people: dirt-poor, unschooled, simple country folk who make do with what they have.
Note: I entered the sympathy card I made for Maureen into the Saturated Canary doily challenge. My number was drawn to win three digis of my choice from Saturated Canary! Woohoo! I love those digis! :^)
In talking to building owners and managers, I’ve learned many are reluctant to engage tenants on any proactive matter (unless it’s something like fire or other safety issues) for fear of “stirring things up.” Even with Chicago absorption returning to pre-recession levels, I think this is a mistake.
But today I found myself giggling at random (which has been VERY rare this winter) and thought I'd share one of the sources of the giggles....
We are to do Jesus' work on earth. To show the world the wonder of his presence through love and grace, not through condemnation and judgment. That is how most non-believers see the church. Jesus didn't hang out with religious people. He was friends with the broken and needy - the unloveables. That's who we are called to love, not ourselves. A former pastor always said he wanted a t-shirt that said "Jesus-A Friend of Sinners."
We grilled hot dogs, ate watermelon and lots of other yummy food. Then we watched a "girly" movie, Enchanted, as we chatted. It was more like, we chatted while the movie played softly in the background. The little girls ran around the house, played with toys, they even had a "pillow" fight (what's a girls night with out a pillow fight?) Then at the end of the movie we got out nail polish and we painted the girls' finger and toe nails and then did our own.
I’m sure all of you are sick of seeing the same scene almost a bajillion times (just 5 times actually). So get out there and try out some HDR! Be aware though, HDR is not meant for every single situation… (As Kai demonstrates with his HDR model shoot.)
Which an overly polite way of saying 'They fucked up completely! They wasted hundreds of millions of pounds! What tossers!'
When you look at the least wealthy in society, and there are a fair few of them (more people earn less than the national average wage than above it), the pile it high sell it cheap business model affords the widest prosperity the largest group of people. People who can afford to celebrate with a bottle of Champagne because the likes of Tesco flog them cheap, but otherwise would not. Knocking the poor appears to be the current zeitgeist of society. How else do we explain the acceptability in referring to people of low income whose tastes may appear vulgar as chavs? You can possibly explain my own dislike of middle class values as having their origins in my own working class childhood. When it boils down to it, university, a professional occupation, a posh lass under the duvet does not alter the tribe to which you belong and I remain one of the chavs and if I’m honest I enjoy offending people with the vulgarity of my freedom of choice. I like that people don’t like it.
from 1967...
THINK and SEE we are at the CRISIS stage being set up NOW! How many ideologues does it take to destroy a nation? Are the Occupy and Tea Party movements just part of a great campaign to destabilize and set us up for a violent crisis? WAKE-UP people!
Anyway, there I was in my long velvet black skirt, an off-white puffy blouse complete with big shoulders and lace; this was, after all, the 80's. I remember sitting in a bedroom with another woman (I can't remember who it was) passing a bottle of Jack Daniels back and forth and declaring our mutual admiration for one another. This was Vermont after all: Get drunk and love.
The only thing that can stop you? That pesky guy in the mirror again.
I would say my favourite collective myths are our own Celtic ones. Walking through a British woodland or standing on a rugged coast, I can still sense the atmosphere of these tales even today, probably because the stories are more earthly bound than those of the Gods and Goddesses of other cultures.
making the
You carry us all along until you say no more…
Rating: +
No spider there either.
They are made by people who look down on Daily Mail readers as mental and cultural inferiors.
accessories (minimal)
But the more significant difference is in where the savings would come from. The Congressional proposals mainly seek caps on annual spending for domestic and military programs and no additional revenues…. – NYT, 7-25-11
THE ROOFTOPS OF PARIS FROM L'INSTITUT DU MONDE DU ARABE
I was snapped back with "If you don't do this here, they'll do it at the hospital"
The loom appears to be complete, and seems to be in pretty good shape. There isn't anything broken and the wood is solid cherry and appears sound. The hardware is a bit rusty, but still functional.
** own my own business **
Today is my most favorite day..... I started with 7:30am mass, then work, I'll go to the 6:30pm yoga class and end the day with my holy hour at church at 10pm. I wish every day could be like that.... ahhhhhh.
Juice Defender is a great 3rd party software which helps out in the batter management. I strongly recommend that Google buy this company and integrate the battery savings into the core part of the OS.
If we abandon community, however, we abandon sanctification. Without God’s family we are left an unfinished masterpiece.
‘The mistake is to make of God either an explanatory God of the gaps or a useful hypothesis to explain the origin of the universe. But we are now returning to the simple and essentially biblically truth that God does not serve any outside purpose.’
Bob - So what you’re what you’re saying is that you have your Driver, 7-iron, pitching wedge and putter, but once in a while, you might need a lob wedge or a utility club.
I know writers are a pretty driven, self-critical bunch, but I don't think that should preclude us from feeling good about ourselves. So no matter what happens with this manuscript, I'm going to be proud of it. Because even if it isn't The One, I've learned so much from writing it!
If ever there was a man deserving of the Nobel Peace Prize then Tsvangirai is it. Deserving because of what he has achieved rather than what he might bring about as is the case with Obama.
Hmmmm. What could this assailant look like? Hmmmm.
What Does Breastfeeding Have To Do with a Child's Behavior?
-Homeowners with cabinetry that is in good shape and has a style that is simple enough to transform with paint
Inspired Shark Cardigan: Tres Blah
For those who want to have something like this for your pre-wedding, please contact us! We would be so excited to create something fabulous for you!
Mark’s agony is over; so are his parents’, who have watched the decimation of a son for years now. II hear that his ex-wife and three-year-old daughter will attend.
Another kitchy dress made by me from a thifted pillowcase. I may not like Harry Potter, but enjoy the novelty of the print. Besides, I was originally attracted by the owl which now resides on the back of the dress.
Found this puppy for $10.00 at the DI. I usually wouldn't have paid that much, but it was vintage, and in GREAT condition! I actually used crafting Toll Paint this time. Just painted a few coats, and let some of the old wood show through. Love the way it turned out, and used it at my latest photo shoot. (I Forgot to get a picture of the before, so I found one that was close to the original by googling vintage high chairs.)
2. If you are a nonblogger or if you don't feel like doing a post on your own blog, then another option is to tell us about a new blogger. If you know a blogger who may not know about Cindy's book or has never came by this wondrous amazing blog of mine, then simply leave them a comment on their blog inviting them to enter the contest and then leave a comment here with a link to your invite. The more new bloggers you invite and link to, the more raffle chances you get so spread the word!!!
How about you? Are you looking for someone who will be faithful to you and love you? It’s the cry of the human heart – and God is waiting to answer that call from your heart to His.
The talented and sweet Montse preparing her camera !!! She really is a very talented photographer and has done a lot of photoshoots all over the world for renowned interior design magazines.
This is my second card for Copic Marker Europe and I decided to colour an image with a darker skin tone. I chose Ribbon Hair Tilda from the Magnolia "You Are So Special" Collection.
She looks like a feminist version of Al Sharpton.
Horny Brit told Alex he needed to get the video thing working so he could see if I was attractive or not, which would determine whether or not he was willing to have an affair with me. Then I think they all wandered off and fell asleep which is probably a good thing.
"This might include implementing travel plans or flexible working for employees, reducing non-essential journeys and making adjustments to delivery schedules to ensure they can remain open for business as normal." (possible solutions for employers to help "staff understand the transport challenges they will face" outlined here)
Wee Papa Girl Rappers Wee rule UK
Jerry Williams, of Little Rock, Arkansas, garnered 4th Place in the Stella’s when he was awarded $14,500 plus medical expenses after being bitten on the butt by his next door neighbor’s beagle – even though the beagle was on a chain in its owner’s fenced yard. Williams did not get as much as he asked for because the jury believed the beagle might have been provoked at the time of the butt bite because Williams had climbed over the fence into the yard and repeatedly shot the dog with a pellet gun.
We — we need — and the president did nothing about this the other night. In fact, his proposal on taxes would make the economy worse.
"Dad, are you sure we should do this?" Abby asked, grasping her foil.
The release of atom power has changed everything except our way of thinking... the solution to this problem lies in the heart of mankind. If only I had known, I should have become a watchmaker. ~Albert Einstein
Replacing animal protein with plant protein
Kinkade’s paintings were anything but controversial, depicting scenes of a light-filled America with a heavy emphasis on home, hearth and church. His sentimental scenes of country gardens and pastoral landscapes in dewy morning light were beloved by many but criticized by the art establishment.
1) You must be a Follower of Christian Writer/Reader Connection.
11am-5pm. Free! At the Albion Peace Centre. Wooooo! My friend Steven has put so much effort into organising this, and if it's anything less than stellar, I promise to forward your complaints onto him. But it won't be. There will be pies, auctions, stalls, entertainment, competitions, and everything you ever dreamed would be at a quaint, small-town fair, with proceeds going to Not-For-Profit organisations. So many awesome vegans will be there. More information is here.
The recipe is as simple as you might guess. You cook some roughly chopped mushrooms in a skillet until they smell good enough that you’re forced to make a piece of toast to tide you over while you stand there, stirring. Then you scrape them into a bowl, put the skillet back on the heat, and lightly caramelize some roughly chopped onions in it. (Don’t worry if you lose track of time while you’re eating your toast and the onions brown too quickly; mine did, and still, the salad rose above.) Then you add the onions to the bowl, along with some chopped egg and fresh dill, and you dress it with a bright, quickly whisked-up sauce of mayonnaise, Dijon mustard, and lemon juice - a sauce that, should you have extra, makes a bang-up dip for asparagus. Then you pile it on a(nother) piece of toast while the whole mixture is still a little warm, and you put a napkin in your lap, because what’s about to happen deserves some ceremony. And then you have lunch.
If you haven't noticed, I've changed the layout on both this blog, and my main blog, that is now called Confessions of a Lunatic Pope.
While Markowitz acknowledges his tendency to clown, "for Brooklyn,” Dovere is astute enough to recognize the "darkness" and vindictiveness behind the jocularity.
Shown is 2 coats topped with a coat of NYC Grand Central Station.
Secondly, some of you may read Kendra's (Grandmother Goddess of the Garden) blog Barely Controlled Chaos. This woman was touched by Mimi's and Julian's story. She felt that Mimi, Michelle from My Semblance of Sanity, and I should meet in person and she made that a reality. She was able to get all three of us tickets to Oprah's show! Mimi, Michelle, and I have been busy making our plans to meet up in Chicago for the show. And then today I got an email from Kendra's daughter. It said that she was in the hospital and had just had emergency brain surgery to remove a tumor earlier this week. She was diagnosed with mestastatic lung cancer. :*( This was a huge shock to her. Anyway, please keep Kendra in your thoughts/prayers.
“You’ve got to make the turntable smaller,” yelled Niko to Joe. “It’s a mini-turntable.”
We officially opened the doors to our new location at 1604 Queen St. West. The shop is bigger and better than ever baby!
Reg. $7.50...Blitsy price $2.99
Speaking of validation, lovely Sharon Vander Meer has nominated the Mobyjoe Cafe for Liebster Blog Award. Sharon’s blog is all about writers and writing. It came on a day that sucked more than an Electrolux–at least that’s what I tweeted at the time, so the boost was much appreciated.
Now over to New Agers. Pretty much the same thing with us. We believe in angels and saints. We believe that a Saint from any religion can help us because they have reached a level of enlightenment much higher than the average person at present and will not care about such petty things as what name you attribute to God. If you call on them they will come, be you Catholic, Protestant, Buddhist, agnostic or New Ager. It doesn’t matter, you called for help they will come and do what they can (understand however it’s more of a whispering in your ear to see the opportunities to earn what you want or to get out of the situation you want to get out of, or at least to calm or strengthen you as the situation and request may call for). (More along the lines of what you saw in the movie City of Angels than in It’s A Wonderful Life).
I woke up and was flooded with sadness. I stared into the dark, quiet room, my husband softly breathing next to me. I counted my heartbeats, trying to lull myself back to sleep. But my mind went backwards, retracing the vividness of the dream. My body tensed. "It wasn't real," I told myself. "Relax."
Edit: I’m staying on the Met until we see a heartbeat. Apparently it is widely widely used in countries such as South Africa, with no evidence of harm. And there is some evidence to suggest that it does help prevent MC. He wouldn’t go a far as to recommend taking it, but I didn’t get the impression he thought it was a bad idea.
Within thirty minutes from Richmond, Tanglewood is a destination in an of itself. Family-style dining. Dinner served up to 7:30. Steamed spriced shrimp among their famous sides and additional entrees. Advance reservations for whole tables (4 and up) available at $40 per person which includes dinner, music, regular beverages, dessert, tax and tip. Beer and wine available, champagne by request.
I have two cards that I made for a couple special blogger friends that went out of their way to be so sweet and thoughtful. I wanted to send them a special thank you card to let them both know it meant a lot. Thank you Carri and Lisa!!!
Carolyn
It says the locution might nowadays be considered “simply another idiomatic usage” had Campbell not noticed it, and that it is “a venial fault” since readers are not confused by it. After examining the various ways punctuation can affect the construction, MWDEU concludes that it “need not be routinely revised out of general writing that does not strive for elevation”.
5 6.5oz cans minced clams in clam juice
The story of the Tower of Babel is familiar with many Christians and also non-Christians. It is a lesson about development. Development happens when people agree about what they want to do, why they want to do it, and how they want to do it. But when there is no common language to use, development breaks down. The lesson is that communication is very important. Without it, development breaks down and becomes meaningless.
This is just a gimmick, and the fact that they really just added alcohol to Bud Light doesn’t make it drinkable. In fact, I’d rather drink my two Bud Lights and enjoy them rather to get the same alcoholic effect than to feel like “eh, I just drank a sub par beer.”
But if you so much as dare to speak,
But if you want to a career in children’s books, heed Tony Bradman’s parting shot: “Don’t be satisfied with just getting by. Dig deeper.”
(202) 401-4005 (FAX)
Because we were not helpless children, we were trusted to be home without a baby sitter. Because our parents didn’t want us to be lazy, or messy, we kept up the house. And our punishments-when we were outrageous, as we often were-involved a complete loss of all recreational devices. TV cords, computer keyboards, books, toys, all removed, sometimes permanently, depending on value.
I woke up thinking about this and could not go back to sleep so rather than fight it, I got up and decided to go for a run to clear my head.
These stunning miniatures come as a pair in a blister and their rules allow them to merge into a duet causing both models to be on a 50mm base rather than each on a 40mm one.
Don’t act like you have time
May God hold you in the palm of His hand.
You may remember, a while ago, Al was quite embarrassed when a fellow-businessman in the town mentioned that he had read this blog and recognised who we were. Al denied knowing about the blog at all, which was not exactly strictly accurate and something equivalent to sticking your fingers in your ears and going 'lalala' to avoid hearing unwelcome news. He was a bit iffy about it, but I refused to give in and stop blogging.
It really can make a statement. This is a terrible
Oprah: “That’s not true?”
You must learn to listen to your body and not expect anything but that your body knows what it is doing. My homebirth was so empowering. As mothers we need this experience.
Today I'm sharing my newest listing with you. This is a large bracelet, however, I can adjust it to fit all sizes. Pretty In Purple Bracelet. It is a really lovely piece!
It is about society too. Why do we allow ourselves as a country to be completely bombarded by foreign propaganda? Why? You know today’s young Nigerians have their teams in Man-united and Chelsea, they don’t remember one local club’s name not to talk of their players.
Pours deep yellow with a huge pillowy tan head, with good carbonation that's some of the slowest I've ever seen in a beer. The slow rise of the bubbles belies the clarity of this beer, and indicates that it may actually have some body despite what looks like more filtration than I've ever seen in a tripel.
But, I interrupt, if his logical approach is to be taken at face value, wouldn’t they also have seen the decomposing body of Jesus, and know that far from coming to life again, he was well and truly dead?
Rnd 4: ch 3, dc in next dc, 2 dc in next dc, *dc in next 2 dc, 2 dc in next dc; repeat from* around; join with sl st to 1st dc (40 dc)
Because these two weren't a match, I visited the minty green wing of my nail polish museum to see if I could find something closer. I selected Essie Turquoise & Caicos and Models Own Jade Stone to come to the swatching room.
10 pm: Spring Break Fashion Show presented by Diane
All ye fellow Indians, Happy Independence Day! Happy to be born free and to be living free. My mom was born in the year of the Quit India movement… and my parents celebrated the very first Independence Day as children. I always miss my grandmother who made delicious sweets every independence day. Today I saw a little girl jump up and down in the streets of Kodigehalli with a flag in either hand… a delightful sight. I am also proud that I am still an Indian celebrating the 15th of August, when many of my one-time close friends celebrate only the 4th of July with great fervour. To call India a ‘young’ democracy generally gets on my nerves., India is one of the oldest democracies in the world. So please don’t call it Bharata Mata’s birthday…
I swear I’m still alive.
Congratulations! If you would please e-mail me your address so I can send you your Penguins of Madagascar gift pack, I will get that right out!
If you go into the bathroom and look into the mirror with the lights off and the room completely black, and then say 'Bloody Mary' thirteen times, a woman will appear and scratch your face up/off.
SOME CRAPPY ACTION
Then, I drank a beer. Yay for that. Which inspired a series of not funny jokes that started to seem funny the more I drank. Yes, I was a wee bit tipsy off of one Bud Light Lime. I’m not ashamed to say it. The jokes went like this, “I can’t get pregnant, but I can drink this entire beer in my pajamas at 4 in the afternoon.” I kept making the jokes about everything and finally DH joined in.
Sure, I'm thick-skinned so I can take all that teasing in stride, but the holiday dovetails nicely with a recent article about creative children being more prone to depression than their non-creative counterparts.
I wrote about composing "The Rose of An Grianan" in this post over the summer. But I didn't tell you that this song had its beginnings as Mom, Sheila and I walked the shore of Lake Superior in March 2010. I hummed and hummed and hummed it until Mom asked, "What's the name of that song?" Little did I know it would take thousands of miles of traveling and a chance encounter with a poetic Irish gardener to finally complete and title the song! An Grianan is the name of the beautiful, Georgian mansion where the harp festival I attended was held - it means (loosely translated from Irish) "the sun always shines here."
Who is this Welfare Queen? Although she is not any one person in particular, she is used to define the thousands of poor mothers who rely on the state for economic aid in order to support their families. The public identity of the welfare queen situates herself in a particular intersection of society that is determined by race, sex, and class. This identity defines welfare recipients as lazy, immoral women of color, with many children, who are incapable of properly socializing their offspring and seek to use tax payers’ hard earned money to fuel a criminal lifestyle. This public identity has been embraced by many Americans over the years, as well as politicians, who use the identity of the welfare queen to establish punitive policies to control the personal and economical lives of poor mothers.
It’s all about letting go. Ma says:
I know lots of questions! Thanks is advance!
The walk ended up being a lot longer than usual and it took me about 70 minutes to get back. Yikes I was 10 minutes late from lunch. Oh well, I miss lunch a lot so I deserve it. By the time I got back I was so thirsty. I ended up drinking about 32 oz of water. Then the rest of the afternoon I spent making trips to the potty. Sheesh.
05 Nothing Happened Today
The interferon is still kicking his butt. He just got up to full dose and in the first full dose, he had a site reaction and it's all red. The second full dose bled heavily and when he gives the injections in his legs, he gets really weak legged. Stuff to talk to the doctor about at his next appointment. My mom says he is actually walking more stable when he isn't using his cane and that is an improvement I don't see. Maybe I'm too close to notice it.
We left the job like we would leave any job. The speakers nestled safely in the cab with us. The furniture stacked in the back so we could sell it and the two of us talking about what ever passing subject came up. Or nothing at all, I can’t really remember.
Today we’ll learn about the second pillar in Islam which is Salat or “prayer”. Our days and nights are centered around prayer. We have 5 obligatory prayers each day and may pray more often and make supplications as much as possible if we wish. The more prayers the more rewards!
John Ayto, author of the Oxford Dictionary of Slang, says it's just another example of how trying to control usage of a word can backfire.
She pointed over to the corner where a large, wood-burning stove stood. An old man sat in front of the fire on a wooden rocking chair, his back turned to us.
No hearing date has been set.
Colours you dislike:
3. I’ve had two close encounters with leopards in the wild.
1 deals
4. Don’t drink and speak… Trust me you don’t sound smart. Contrary to what your brain is telling you.
“Fine!!!”
Being a rare talking gorilla, I could virtually set my own terms in my performing career. Yet when negotiating my salary with Mr McDougall, the proprietor of the circus, I insisted on a salary of no more than five times that of the next highest paid artiste.
Oh, never mind.
- Training official for Persal training (1997);
If, after reading this, you believe it all to be true.
Wow, What a Big Deal!!!!
The group is in favour of direct military intervention, and their money funds the Ugandan government’s army and various other military forces. Here’s a photo of the founders of Invisible Children posing with weapons and personnel of the Sudan People’s Liberation Army. Both the Ugandan army and Sudan People’s Liberation Army are riddled with accusations of rape and looting, but Invisible Children defends them, arguing that the Ugandan army is “better equipped than that of any of the other affected countries”, although Kony is no longer active in Uganda and hasn’t been since 2006 by their own admission.
The Republican primary is over…thank god. Well, at least it’s realistically over, if not technically over. I think Mitt Romney’s victory in the Republican primary has cemented Barack Obama as a two-term president. Mitt is boring, stiff, and totally uncharismatic. He’s out of touch with most people, and it’s palpable. While Republicans will fall in line for the most part, Romney does not excite the base, and independents are not fooled by the back and forth (etch-a-sketch) stances on every issue; they see Romney as being hollow, and blowing with the political winds of popularity. While the election will probably be close – all modern day presidential elections are – President Obama will reinvigorate Democrats (and the nation as a whole) with a charismatic campaign (even while he’s been unable to excite us as president).
Perhaps it was Malcolm’s dream house.
Also, since one of my favorite snacks is apples and peanut butter, I'm trying a natural peanut butter instead of my beloved low fat Jiffy. I tasted the 365 version and it's good! This is part of my effort at eating less processed food. (You can bet I'm not giving up my coffee and creamer though!)
And one thing to note for the people who leave. The grass is rarely greener. I will say that the three raiders who left Dreamstate for greener pastures did not find them. And the 14 who left Conquest probably won’t either. All they will find is that Matticus dealt with a lot of headaches they didn’t even know existed! Probably the only case where you will be happier is if you make a radical change in your raiding focus i.e. go from casual to hardcore or hardcore to casual (I actually think those words are hopelessly inadequate to define raiding teams these days, but they will do). RFA wouldn’t be useful for these players either, because if you want to make that change in focus you are never going to be happy staying where you are and forcing people to stay would just build up that resentment again.
I went back to bed making a mental note to search the leftover containers of soup for chunks of bay leaf. And then I remembered that story about Stone Soup from way back in grade two.
This year I will be there for various events. If you are around come and say hello.
Hello blog-land! Very soon, I promise to be back to regularly scheduled teacher programming. Feels like it's been a long time.
How completely filled in
Rambling around this weekend, collecting random beauty, and a few interesting somethings to show you...
Penn State University had no other option than to dismiss the legendary Joe Paterno from his position of head football coach for the Nittany Lions.
Other: Stickles Stardust, Crackle accent, Liquid pearls white opal
cool for 5 mins then add peanut butter – stir until smooth
Dark red color with a fleating white head. Malt, citrus and spice in the scent. Tast has some light roasted malt, slight cinnamon. Low carbonation and hops, very dinkable and goes down quick. Light bady. The beer tastes sweeter and just better when it's warmer, kinda reminds me of a stout. Another great one from Shiner, though I know we have a lot of hater out there.
What Image Do I Want To Portray? Professional writer, funny, approachable. Maybe it’s a woman thing – or maybe it’s just a Teresa thing, but this was the terror-filled part of the process. I have a few more answers to this question, but don’t ask – I’m not showing you. Another great thing about this Mission Statement assignment? No one ever has to see it.
What do you love to do?
14. Huckleberry Hound
Chapter 1 - A Cup of Lemonade
The candles in the background can be lit for taking a relaxing bath.
The Zeste de Vigne evokes an undefinable floral bouquet spiced with the leaves and fruits of lemon trees. It's impossible to explain, but out-of-this-world lovely.
I loved that man so much and always will. But in 1976 Mom and Dad led our family toward something better than they could ever supply on their own--faith in God through His Son, Jesus Christ. There isn't a gift under the sun that is greater than that, in fact it's that gift that carried me through his recent sickness and death as I sang, "What a day that will be..."
I also learned that he is a current nominee for the Turner prize and that he's almost the same age (maybe a year younger) as the artist I used to confuse him with, David Rayson. I'd be interested to read some comparative criticism of these two artists if anyone feels up to the task??
Place them in an oven until thoroughly crystallised (200°C for a few minutes).
A prefect addition to the kitchen for all your memos or shopping list but is also a sweet little item to write love notes on too. This heart chalkboard would make a really sweet gift idea & is perfect for weddings too.
My own recipe
The opposite of hyperglycaemia, hypoglycemia causes fits due to a lack of glucose to the brain, which is why diabetics must monitor and manage their blood sugar levels in order to remain healthy.
”I really just want to color, mom.”
Luke 2:15-18
Definitely picking the car every time. Plane is a bit more overwhelming since it feels like there's a bunch of people trapped in a case for what feels like a million miles away from earth! And here's the moment where all the anxious-neurotic-soon-to-be-flight-attendants(just like yours truly:P) start panicking and throw tomatoes this way:P Definitely not helping, right?! Well if it makes it a little better it's been proved that plane is the fastest and the most secure transportation method.. so cheers to that:) Better?!:) hi hi Now how about you ladies? How do you prefer traveling: by plane or by car... or maybe time machine?!;) hi hi Feel free to share your choice here with us and find out what other fellow bloggers said too:) Now let's get this party started!
He smiled at me and then the music started playing
Well...I did do a load of laundry. One day. Maybe two. Needless to say, the size of my laundry pile currently leaves MUCH to be desired.
The story is much more complex with Android, thanks to the large variety of models that run it. Some Android models now have 4-inch screen or 4G LTE networking, both of which burn through much more battery life. To get a sense of what that means, some 4G LTE Android phones are being touted as successes because they can work 8 hours straight without a charge. That means they don’t last an entire day, just a work day. I’m sure the faster networking is great, but that’s too much of a trade-off for me.
After the “nerd” discussion last week, I asked Kyle about it.
Fact; I wanna get a tattoo. ;D
I am off to melt into an inner tube on the Madison river. My muscles deserve some relaxation, and how else can I get rid of my spando-bike-short tan?
‘What?… And we chopped his other hand off… then the weather would be… a lot nicer… and we…’
Here are some more links I love:
This entire display of familial chivalry inspired to make bees my theme for my classroom this year. It works on so many levels. My students will be learning to become a part of their "hive" or class community. They will work together like the workers in the hive, and they will then grow to help the world (hopefully) become a more beautiful place.
February 2 is a New Moon; always a good time to take stock of what you want to bring into your life and take action in ritual and in the rest of your life to make it so.
Now, not only has her dad come out of his depression to be a father again, and a pain as well, but Caleb's enemies know he's imprinted and are after Maggie to stop them both from gaining their abilities and take her from him.
This is the same area as the last photo after about an hour of hot, sweaty work with the shovel. Just glad I didn't hit any really big rocks cuz I didn't take the pick axe up there with me. You can see where I dug through the pile of dirt that washed down, clearing the channel so it can go on down the way it is supposed to.
It’s a quiet, quiet life
Marley stood on the head of the handicap sign and said, "Ha ha! I'm standing on my head!"
Jefferson is black.
I like taking on the things I feel passionate about because of the very fact that books aren't widgets. Otherwise it's just about the money and though that is one way to agent, it's not right for me.
Don’t tell me you want a conclusion
Sometimes when we work on particular places or issues we have to dive in deeply and become well versed on things that we seldom associate with historic preservation. My first project at the Trust 25 years ago required me to learn about funerary art, burial practices and cemetery management. Those weren’t exactly subjects I studied in school. I have referred to myself as an “accidental expert” in many things over the years. Add Cruise Ship Tourism to the list.
These were the hottest races on a track that was scorching! After what seemed like a somewhat down Zurich meet for the athletes, everyone seemed to have their second wind in Brussels – making me wish this was the middle of the season instead of the end! If nothing else, however, it wets the appetite for 2012 and London – and leaves much to talk about heading into the Olympic season. Let the speculation begin – because while the competition is ending I have lots to talk about! We can start with today’s deuce. Watch below. As Arnold said “I’ll be back”.
Sikh-Muslim Relations in the UK and the World
Benefits from: Markets run on information. Corporation tax and top rate. City protections. Investing in his future.
Well, come on. A colonization? In my vagina?
With each sketch there will also be a 'challenge' posted. You MAY complete two layouts for each sketch this time! Your choice, one with the sketch, and then one with the challenge! BUT if you use BOTH of them for each time you MUST TURN,FLIP, or MIRROR the sketch! For example, if you use the sketch and the challenge on one layout then want to complete it again, you MUST TURN, FLIP or MIRROR it for a second one, even if you are just doing the sketch on the second one. If you are solely doing the 'challenge' part then you don't have to, you will just need to complete the challenge!
Also, anoyone have recommendations for me of camping with young children in a dirty, dusty camp site? We've done this 2 times before at this site and I'm hoping to make it all more enjoyable for me this time;)
3/4 cup whole milk
Heads up world here we come!
“We were out on a bike ride in the spring of 2009 when we passed an amazing contemporary house beside a listed Norman abbey,” recalls Emily, an economist. Inspired by what they had seen, the Hunts posted a note through the door of the house, asking who had designed the three storey property. In return they received an email putting them in touch with Halliday Clark Architects in Bradford. “We explained that we wanted to build something smaller, in a similar style and for a much lower budget, and Adam Clark was extremely excited about the idea,” says Tom.
They beyond Pleased Us. They led the British Invasion like a glorious stampede we just couldn’t get enough of. Before the bitterness of Nam when for just a brief moment in time we were still thought of as innocent. But as we entered the revolution of the mid-60s it was the Beatles that continued writing the soundtrack………until they decided to pass the torch.
I met with all of the staff today that have helped me along on my journey. Along with that, I met with my psychologist who gave me this bound book that she put together. It is entitled ‘Letters from the heart’ and contains every single email correspondence that we’ve had between us since October 2010. In some ways, our ‘email therapy’ was more thorough and honest that our face-to-face therapy. I opened up so much in the letters to her. Found it much easier to communicate this way. Along with about 60 emails she has printed off, she also wrote me a letter just inside of the book. it reads:
The heat of the summer is more of an issue here, than winter cold. In the enclosed part, there are doors that open to screened windows to get cross ventilation. In July and August I keep an old sheet draped over the top to shield the coop from the brutal afternoon sun, since our back yard neighbor cut down their large oak tree. Sometimes I wet the sheet down to help them keep cool, when we hit triple digits. Ameracaunas are a good hot weather breed, as they are not very big and heavy. There are usually only a few nights in the winter when we have to rig up a heat lamp. This winter I think we only used it a total of 4 nights.
Bir az aci= This will hurt a little
I love the contrast.
Which is why I was up late. Because I had to sit with SH while he went through every single record to correct the donation dates, even though I pointed out to him that in the 25 years before I had married him and had been doing my own taxes, I had never been 1. audited or 2. imprisoned. Which meant that it took a while to complete the taxes. Which never should have waited until the night before they were due, anyhow.
Pictures below.
We can see the classification of Goldings is based around hops propagated from Canterbury Whitebines and Mr Golding’s famous hop, which was itself propagated from a Canterbury Whitebine. It’s clear that there’s something anachronistic going on grouping these hops under the name of ‘Goldings’. Percival notes that Canterbury Whitebine and Goldings were considered quite separate hops initially and it was not until after the middle of the 19th century that they were merged into one group. In 1901 he said it’s “customary to apply the term ‘Goldings’ to the best class of hops, such as the Canterbury and Farnham Whitebines, the Bramling and Mathon hops, with Cobb’s and the Rodmersham varieties, and stretched occasionally to include others of less repute.” This practice was continued by the Hop Marketing Board and carries on to this day.
Slit by slit, memory by memory
Dash each salt and black pepper, or more to taste
She has created numerous cards for the challenges including many magazine publications as well!!
I’ve talked with a couple of women who have been on this journey, and that has been so very helpful to see that we’re not alone and that we WILL get through this, but there is no way to do it on our own. We HAVE to give this to God. Only He is strong enough to bear a load like this. I remember expressing awhile back that I was in a spiritual funk, and I wanted to be out of that. Now I think, “Okay!! Okay!! But did You have to bring THIS, God to get me out off it????” Maybe it was that bad? :/
Our first matchup of the Winter Bracket of the 2012 Battle of the Books pits J.M. McDermott's When We Were Executioners against Charles de Lint's Eyes Like Leaves. Per our contest rules, I have read the first 25 pages of both, and the winner will be the book I most want to continue reading.
Do I sit in wallow in my own self pity, depressed because I gave into a moment of weakness? Or do I forget it and move on?
17. Sorry Doesn't Help (Years of Refusal)
We took a long walk and then JP had to cram 14 hours of work into the 10 hours he had left in the day, so I took Claire to Walmart for the continuation of Easter festivities. I agonized over bath towel colors and accessories and Claire picked up a few pillow pet friends to keep her company in the bath aisle. We said goodbye to them before check-out. We got home just before a big rainstorm hit, so the kids and I watched Puss in Boots while JP toiled away. Then I made prime rib for the first time ever, which introduced my only source of stress for the day. We have purchased steak approximately 10 times in our entire marriage and this was the most expensive piece of anything we'd ever put in our shopping cart. AND we somehow lost our meat thermometer and it was raining too hard to make me want to go out and get one. So I winged it (and stressed over it) and read approximately 1,000 online recipes and reviews (and stressed some more).
You all were super amazing last year and submitted your votes... and Simplicity placed in the top 5 of WDIV's Vote 4 the Best Contest. Thank you soooo much for your support.
As grand as Machu Picchu is, it was only inhabited for about 100 years. As the Spanish approached, the Inca evacuated in the mid 1500’s allowing the lush vegetation to quickly reclaim the city. Sacred stones that were destroyed in other cities the conquistadors plundered were left untouched, leaving Machu Picchu a largely intact archeological site.
Jen x
A reasonably catchy “Introduction to Anarchism” via Religion, Royalty and Margaret
So quiet down cobwebs; Dust go to sleep!
that these colours will ever be so so
As the blues gained national attention, Rainey was one of the first African-Americans ever to record their singing. (The first known was Mamie Smith in 1920.) In 1923, she signed a contract with Paramount. In the space of six years she made over 100 records for the label, working with rising stars like Louis Armstrong. While recording, she continued to tour with Pa Rainey as well as the Wildcats Jazz Band led by black music pioneer Thomas Dorsey. Travelling throughout the South and Midwest, she performed for both black and white audiences.
So Mama, don't take my Kodachrome away"
movie scores
You might also recognize the flowers. I had some left over from my wreath. (Keep those leftovers!) They are Fifties Flower file from Boss Kut also. I took this close-up so you could see my sentiment hanging off the Sky Trendy Twine. How awesome is that?!?! The Easter Greeting set had just what I was looking for. I just hand drew the bunting and cut out. Kind of matches that crack in the egg. Wait, what's that crack in the egg for? I think he's hatching!!!
Next to that was a smaller pool that we called the new pool and was one that was only five feet deep and usually used more by older members. Near the larger pool was a snack bar that sold potato chips, sodas and candy products and beside it was a small basketball court and a slab of concrete with one wall where some played handball. And scattered around the grassy areas were several multi-colored triangular wooden objects we called dog houses.
One thing I found interesting was the undercurrent of intensity in the crowd watching the action. The players acted with purpose and intent, but that is to be expected. What struck me was you could also describe many of the spectators as watching with purpose and intent.
The second product I want to feature looks like a lot of fun for snacks & lunches. The Snack Bar Maker & Keepers allow you to make your own snack bars, using the ingredients YOU prefer, and provides a no-toss, reusable package to carry it to the office, school or playground. Hmmm...healthy & sustainable? Brilliant! There's even a recipe for Cherry Peanut Butter Granola Bars in the flyer. (You may need to zoom your screen to read it.)
Estée Lauder was driven by the desire to create a sporty scent that was sophisticated without being overwhelming; a fragrance befitting the tennis court and the gym. The concept was clear, but the execution was decidedly complex, resulting in a formula that included over 300 ingredients. The fragrance pyramid for Aliage varies slightly, depending on the source. In Fabulous Fragrances II author Jan Moran provides these key notes: Greens, Peach and Citrus in the top, Jasmine, Rosewood, Pine and Thyme in the heart, and Oakmoss, Musk, Vetiver and Myrrh in the base.
That's what I love about the Imagine cartridges, all the colors match and coordinate.
Muscle mass decreases as we age, in fact it has been estimated that muscle mass decreases approximately one percent each year after we turn thirty years old.
Once again, the very lovely
I have always been slightly dubious of personality tests. They can never fully describe someone’s personality type – we are all unique. However, they can definitely highlight some natural strengths. And being a confident and authentic leader is about playing to your strengths – rather than trying to become someone you are not; someone you would like to be.
One day, I will have a little room or area of my apartment or house which I will furnish and set out in the British Campaign motif. It is, to my mind, a very masculine style… perfect for a ‘man cave’ or even a ‘man corner.’
Duration: 6 Months
The doctor (his resident) came in and checked Jude over and then the fellow and the attending doctors came over as well. They ordered a chest x-ray (which turned out perfectly fine with no concerns), drew some blood for cultures/tests, and did an ultrasound on the swollen femoral area.
Mix everything well. Hands work best. If the mixture seems too loose, add more bread crumbs. If it feels too dry and tight, add water or non-dairy milk.
13-Blues Before Sunrise
Hare: Yeah Wally. This is totally uncool. You better not ask the bear to do what you should be doing.
Prophet Muhammed Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam) has been addressed as Yaa-Aiyu-Han-Nabi 11 times and has been named as “Ahmed” in Paara 28, Surah Saff, Ayath 6.
So, I am used to splinters, scratches and cuts.
1 cup oatmeal, 1/2 cup peanut butter (or other nut butter), 1/3 cup honey 1 cup coconut flakes, 1/2 cup ground flaxseed, 1/2 cup mini chocolate chips, 1 tsp vanilla Mix everything above in a medium bowl until thoroughly incorporated. Let chill in the refrigerator for half an hour. Once chilled, roll into balls and enjoy! Store in an airtight container and keep refrigerated for up to 1 week.
I have been neglectful, I will admit that right up front. The last week has been chock full of stuff, including a boyfriend visit over the weekend. I shall now attempt to fill in the blanks. This morning turned out to be an interesting trip. I went into town for routine blood tests, then stopped in at my local favorite home improvement store. While there, I decided to look for one thing that wasn’t on my list. A pool floatie. Last year’s model had died, and I wanted another one like it. But when I went to the aisle with the pool stuff, outside, it was blocked off. I had to go up front to locate a store person, who then looked to verify there was no apparent reason for the blockade and then called to make sure they were done. Well, they weren’t. And they also weren’t moving heavy equipment around, at least not for normal store purposes. As it turned out, a baby owl had fallen to the ground. There are a couple of barn owls who live there, which I hadn’t known before, and their new little baby had fallen out. Eventually, after giving them time to finish up, I found out that there had been 3 babies. Only one survived, and it has been replaced in the ‘nest’. Then they fortified things, so that wouldn’t happen again. I finally was able to go into that aisle, where I met up with the guy who was fixing things for the owls. He pointed out the mama owl, who was directly above the pool stuff I wanted to look at. Dad was farther away, watching over the newly replaced baby in the nest. Gosh, they’re beautiful creatures! And I was left with a feeling of awe for these lovely birds, who are pleasantly accepted by the store employees. The owls do their part and keep the rodent population down, so get fed whilst doing chores. A working bird, a happy partnership. Just hope the baby makes it.
I did OK. The system seemed a little haphazard; everyone dived in, picked up whatever they wanted, shoved it in bags or boxes which were then left in a pile while you went back to search some more. When you'd done, the man in charge tipped out your items, ran a cursory eye over your selection, and came up with a fairly random figure. Some dealers were haggling; I just paid, without really knowing if he was overcharging me or not. It turned out I paid an average of 35p an item, which is fine with me.
I am huge fan of campy horror films, but after audiences’ tepid response to Piranha in 2010 there is little hope for the sequel to succeed. Usually fans flock to horror films while critics bash the film the moment the previews start, yet this marks one of the only occasions where the opposite occurred. Based on the trailer, the sequel looks even more absurd which will most likely please only hardcore horror films, but unfortunately, this won’t translate in box office success with horror fans disappearing from the cinema more and more each year. With only a $20 million budget, the gore porn flick should at least break even, but any hopes for a third installment will be put to rest.
So at the end of week 1, I have a completed flash story, a completed short story, an outlined story, and a chunk of something else. It's actually better than I thought it would be.
Whether you call it marketing or branding or anything else is simply a question of semantics. The important question is not what you call it, but how do you do it? How do you build a strong brand?
¡Feliz Navidad!
To say we were exhausted is an understatement.
But the future postseason structure will bring change. A four-team setup would create two semifinals, which might take place within the current bowl structure, but most likely will not. The semis could take place at on-campus sites belonging to the higher seeds, a plan Delany advocates, or at neutral sites like Indianapolis’ Lucas Oil Stadium and Detroit’s Ford Field. The Edward Jones Dome in St. Louis? Beats facing LSU in NOLA.
Stamps - Orchids (Flourishes)
The bottle is 500ml and the product is organic and bottle-conditioned. It was quite lively and despite careful pouring, it came out a hazy amber with a medium off-white head. The aroma was moderate levels of ginger; not unappealing, but not as pronounced as I would have guessed.
Just when I started typing; the following words in a song started playing in the background…
2. Knife friendly: Plastic also has this advantage over glass and stone cutting surfaces, but I prefer wooden cutting boards because they are easier on your knives. Your knives will keep there sharpness longer and you will have to make less trips to the sharpener or the emergency room. A dull knife is extremely dangerous as you tend to put more pressure increasing the possibility of a kitchen injury and a potential missing finger.
with her barbies in her room while
Whereas Paul’s confessions were pre-biblical, the Apostles’ Creed is (obviously enough) post-Biblical. That is to say, while the confessions that Paul cites had their basis in the earliest Christian tradition, the Apostles’ Creed has its basis in what is now known as the NT canon. For instance, it incorporates “who was conceived by the Holy Spirit, born of the Virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate” from the Gospels and “he descended into hell” from Paul.
So I’ve been trying to find the words to say,
Hope y'all have a Happy Sunday and Presidents Day tomorrow!
How to express in words the magic of this film, or any Ruiz film for that matter? Its narrative, like a tall tale dusted off and handed down by the narrator to its curious listener, is full of strange tangents, jarring twists and a variety of intangible loose ends. There are stories within stories - a kaleidoscope of images, refracted, like a cracked mirror-ball manifestation - which traipse backwards and forwards between mystery, fantasy, thriller, melodrama and farce, as if the whole thing is being invented for our amusement (before the rug is pulled out from under us by yet another narrative left-turn!)
Christianity gave Eros poison to drink—but he didn’t die from that. He degenerated into a vice.
That lead to another discussion of all the possibilities of what can be done with Tebow tears.
Green River
And here I am again all logical and reasonable. Because although saying out loud "He raped me and then he told me he'd break my neck if I told anyone".. well it's out there, at the moment those words are just floating in universe and have absolutely no connection to myself. But.. I did write in my journal when I came home and the more I write the more connected I seem to become. Except now I have yet again shut my emotions off to be able to get on with my day.
There is little by the way of welcome in pubs these days. Eye contact by bar staff is kept to a minimum and attempts at conversation, even in an empty pub, are often met with blank indifference, or even looks of amazement. A simple smile and "hello" often seem too much to ask. Staff seem happiest when gossiping amongst themselves. Recognise the picture? When I worked in the pub, I was taught always to acknowledge your customer, have a word if possible and unless actually serving someone else, always,repeat always stop what you are doing and serve the customers. Nothing,it was emphasised, was more important than that. Oh and always say goodbye and thanks. I was taught a lot more besides, by a true old school landlord. It is why I have such high standards when I visit pubs. It really is just as easy to do it well as badly and, oddly makes the job itself way more satisfying.
She rang off with the cheery information that we would have to wait until Monday before anyone would be in the office to register our complaint.
Archduke Charles
The data have all been published. The library has chosen not to do so. Instead it reports on quite other aspects – collections and web services – without turning the absolute frequencies into indicators.
suppose one fallen morning i failed to arise from beneath the frayed blue duvet that was my shelter
The main characters here are prime minister and some of his cabinet colleagues and political rivals. The story revolves around prime minister and how his political and personal life gets mixed up. As part of his negotiation with US, he is trying to have an agreement so that US will have more say in the defense of Canada and whole of North America but his political rivals will term it as giving up sovereignty of the country. I still remember that one point of negotiation was to hand over Alaska to Canada in return.
(but you could also use a sharp hole punch).
4532 2453 3245......
Nevertheless, something about trains -- possibly the freedom associated with getting on something that rapidly takes us away from where we are in a manner that defies turning around and going back at any point -- brings out a similar feeling in people. I know I feel it.
Oh, and yeah, I won third place in that competition. *wink*
I am re-reading A Wrinkle in Time and began to think over how this book inspired me as a child. I was an avid reader even as a very young child, but this is the book that truly inspired me to want more out of reading and eventually lead to my love of writing.
The mouth's full malt body is non-existent in terms of taste, but is quickly bathed in a strong citric and piney hop flavor that dominates each mouthful, start to swallow. But it is not unbalanced or astringent, leaving the palate thirsty after each sip. The 7% ABV is noticeable relatively quickly, and brings a pleasant and complimentary addition to an already excellent beer. It was gone in no time, and found myself wishing for another. Refreshing and enjoyable, hop-heads who like balance to their beers should seek this one out.
I love doing things for children so I jumped at the chance to be a part of this very special hop, I hope they will love my layout as much as I enjoyed making it! :)
I swear I’ve interviewed her at length about her work, and have been laboring in vain to find a finished or published piece, aside from my brief mention of her in No Applause. In the 90s I was working on a piece on radical street theatre for American Theatre that got aborted; and in 2004 I wrote a piece on protest theatre for the Village Voice. It may have been for one of those. At any rate, I did come across some fragments I jotted down for another aborted piece on Circus Amok I seem to have started a few years ago after seeing one of their performances. Apropos of nothing, here they are…
The first is related to the popular song contest “Eyal Golan is Calling You” (at least popular here), where the contestants are trying to become the best Mizrahi-singer in Israel, or at least winner of a contest, where the genre is Mizrahi. Mizrahi is a special genre of music, which kind of can be described as a mix of Greek and Arab music, song in Hebrew. It was the form of expression for the Mizrahi Jews (hence the name), who are Jews from the Arab countries, in earlier decades, where their social standings typical were below the average social standings, and there was a general discrimination against them. It wasn’t very mainstream until Zohar Argov, the “King of Mizrahi,” had his success and opened the genre for the wider Israeli public. Later he was followed by stars such as Zehava Ben, Ofra Haza, Sarit Hadad, and already mentioned Eyal Golan.
To beginning crafters I might seem to be somewhat advanced, but I want to emphasize the fact that I am still learning. The pieces I have shared with you here are basically the extent of my knowledge. The only other endeavor I tackled was making a headband with a giant bow and sparkly gemstones for my friend Danielle (who is in love with all things flashy with bows)
I have a deep admiration for women who work with their hands
Use the following questions to consider if your desire for marriage has become a demand:
Also I’m working on my Christmas presents for this year. Today I have Knitted Bags to put my gifts in. I make mittens, scarves and hats to put in the bags…but you can use them for anything. They make a lovely package with a homemade gift tag or card.
Full of unexpected surprises,
like a mountain meadow
BAPTISMAL REGENERATION In considering this subject, we shall do well to begin by endeavouring to ascertain the true meaning of the word Regeneration, as employed in the New Testament ; and then proceed to inquire into the connection of this spiritual experience with the ordinance of Christian Baptism.
People take jet planes, they come and go for various reasons. Our lives mingle with others in such inexplicable ways. We can be enriched by the experiences or made bitter. I had a drink with an ex-boyfriend a few nights ago; he’s been quite ill but manages to be upbeat and positive. We have remained friends and still get together sporadically. I like being able to hold on to connections like that. Over the last 22 months, I’ve made great friends through this blog and your comments and holiday greetings have given me a sense of richness. Who knew I’d have acquaintances all over the country-all over the globe?
and nectar.
- I went boogie-boarding & took wave-punch to the gut. (Thank you strange mexicano who pulled me on to the sand after I was knocked windless in the surf.
"Forget about that. Let's just go back."
exposed
The Blue Men are breast-high with foam-grey faces;
Wildcrafted Nopal Cactus
Rachel had this ridiculous fantasy where she ended up writing this brilliant message. David notices it for some miraculous reason, and then writes her back. Maybe he somehow finds out her e-mail address and writes to her privately. They meet, fall in love, get married, live happily ever after.
Need any last minute gift ideas for teachers, babysitters, mail carriers, hair dressers, etc? Dunkin' Donuts has an awesome gift pack of 2 pounds of their original coffee and 2 thermal commuter mugs for $19.99! You can even split it into 2 gifts for $10 each! Not bad! Or Dunkin' Donuts offers rechargeable gift cards in any amount between $5 and $200. (Man, I'd love me one of these because let me tell ya, I run on Dunkin'!)
Oh hi. I didn’t see you there. This is Definitely Improvised. That is both a true statement and the title of this site. This podcast masquerades as an improvised radio show. I am the disembodied typing words of one Bryan Fernando, a 25-year-old comedian from Portland, OR. Odds are, you know who Bryan is because only Bryan’s friends know about this podcast. What happens each week (okay, let’s be honest, every few weeks) is I will have some friends over, we will talk about stuff, and then we will pull some newspaper clippings out of a Ziploc bag and do scenes based on those newspaper clippings. Sometimes we follow a living room format, sometimes we follow an Armando type of format. This time we did a sort of Harold format. After all is said and done, we improvise the interstitial music.
If your muscles tighten up, it can cause lots of pain and result in a loss of flexibility, this is why it is so important to stretch in whatever way you like best (or multiple ways). Being inflexible can cause joint pain, muscle pain, poor posture, injuries and the list goes on and on.
I am back.
Shamrocks at your doorway
Revenge.
Now I don't think everyone shouldn't do coupons . There are plenty of things you can get with coupons that are useful . The most common thing I hear is getting free toothbrushes or hand soaps etc , by using multiple coupons , or matching coupons with sales . So yes , coupons can save you money . For me , taking the time to go through the coupons to save a dollar on toothpaste isn't worth it because that is likely the only coupon I would be using . If you buy all those miscellaneous items , (The frozen dinners etc .) anyways , then yes , please coupon .
But what I often find is that people want instant gratification, instant change. And whilst I know for sure
As the author of two hero's journey novels and one heroine's journey novel, I often ponder the thought processes that cause a hero or a heroine to act in both immediate and long-term dangerous situations. In fiction, the danger and the negative consequences become part of stories that make people buy exciting books. In life, similar consequences send people to psychologists.
basis of what God told him in Genesis 17:5 “……for
2. Connections were made: To me, that’s the real value of a TweetUp; connecting with folks in real-time. Business cards were flying everywhere! That was one of the intentions when we came up with this idea last year, for some like-minded folks to come together and share. Now we just need a few more cool folks to come out…
you would like. Do you have a drop roller coaster in your town? How
But regardless of the out-of-town destination, it’s the people around you who make it all the more worthwhile and memorable.
your dumbo ears to your nose…
All of the rescued dogs are then cared for, awaiting adoption into a permanent loving home. Once the dogs have completed 8-10 days quarantine they are placed into a foster home.
Cara Haycak started her writing career at Columbia University’s graduate writing program and received an MFA in 1995.
Raves started in England, and they were parties where people listened to electro dance music and techno, so nothing has changed since then… They like peace, love, unity, and respect- basically, they’re new-age hippies.
The lucky winners names will be drawn February 14 at 11:59pm EST and posted before midnight February 15th.
And lady-smocks all silver-white
The thing I’m most guilty of breaking?
The first thing it will do is get millions of young men off the streets and out of trouble
Here are some other fur vests for your shopping pleasure :)
She took a trip to visit friends in her hometown midway through our relationship. I did not join her, and there were disastrous consequences. A few days before she was scheduled to come back, she called me distraught. I asked her what was wrong and she didn’t want to give it up, but eventually did – she was raped by a childhood friend of hers. I went ballistic. I was absolutely livid. If you ever want to see the highest possible rage I can exhibit, rape someone. You had better pray that I don’t get to you before the police will, because they’ll be scraping you off of the sidewalk (and any nearby buildings and vehicles) for years when I’m done.
Here Are Five How to Get Taller Tips That Will Work For Anyone
“Many of the dogs were filthy, covered in feces with matted fur and overgrown nails,” said Humane Society Executive Director Laura Clark.
She closed her eyes calling his name out loud,
There is a power in me, I know it.
She has such an amazing sense of design, and a taste for theatrics which I find completely inspiring. Whenever there's a movie featuring her beautiful designs, I can't keep myself away from the theater.
Chapter 57
Cost: $30 per person
* Create a wide, generous and secure platform for the active involvement of community groups
is an apt one. When the native countries of the musicians
Time with the kids is important in rearing them
15And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire.
*1/3 cup chopped green onions (optional, I left them off in my picture because I didn’t have any)
I used to find You in broken lives and beautiful faces
A smile is the light in the window of your face that tells people you’re at home. ~Author Unknown
A lot of the Tim Holtz metals have been re-ordered and are now in stock along with a few that we didn't carry before. We'll always re-order Tim's products but it's hard to keep them on the shelves. Please let us know if there is something you've been looking for but don't see in the store. Chances are it's just sold out, but we'll put you first on the list when we next re-order. NOTE: We have his fragments and memo pens in for those who've been looking for them. Tim's NEW fall dies and other items are due to ship mid-September. His NEW Christmas dies and items are due to ship mid-October.
16. Reality shows and musical shows.
So…Evil Charges…go suck a tree. Peace of Mind, even this Evil Joy’s mind, is worth a pretty penny (or several of them as the case may be….)
I'm always excited to make progress on dragons. Here they be so far:
In sacred sexuality, there is the absence of desire, and the fullness of life itself. The whole body-being begins to feel like a sex organ, alive and pulsing with life. Spiritual bliss replaces orgasm and it is not limited to physical contact or genital stimulation. It is a spiritual lasting state that is not conditional upon action. The spine is a conduit for life force energy that pulses energy through every cell. There are no wild multiple orgasms that make you fabulously funky, and proud of your spiritual prowess. In sacred sexuality there is a genuine merging with the One. The mind is calm, clear and fully alert, yet relaxed. The body is present, open, gentle and very strong. This is a yogic state. This is a path to the divine.
You can add another layer of stenciled pastels in a different color, airbrush on top of it, stamp--really you can do any combination you can think of. So cool.
From said he has nothing against Clinton's wife, Sen. Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, or the other seven Democratic presidential candidates. He even understands why they won't attend the DLC meeting. But that doesn't make him worry any less about the future of his party.
I was sad there weren’t many other animals on the blog.
#BrothersOnTheRun
I got the look. And then maybe the snort. Or at least some kind of sound that let me know that no one wanted to be on the road early enough for me to go to camp. Okay... I can respect that.
The amount of muscle mass that a person has significantly impacts the amount of calories they burn while at rest. In other words, the more muscle you have, the more likely you are to not put on excess fat/weight since muscles consume a lot of calories while at rest.
The majority of us do not condone any act of violence on our streets and I hope the police will bring to book those responsible for the fracas on April 28.
Before my shopping trip i thought id sit and have a nice coffee, in the supermarket cafe. So i got my coffee, put my headphones in and sat down with the paper for a quiet 10mins before i started.
Order Items :
He and Tina both swore that these conversations were innocent. She was a married woman, after all. They were simply catching up and talking about how crazy it was that her sister ultimately married his brother. And don’t you know that takes eight months to talk about? Tina admitted she hadn’t told her husband she was back in touch with my ex fiancé, but that was because it was innocent. “If it is innocent, why would you keep it a secret from your husband?” I asked. She didn’t have a good answer.
The other day my sister Cheryl took a picture of Jenalyn and then showed it to her on her camera and Jenalyn said, "Ew, my eyes look funny. Don't put that on FaceBook!"
Cool the crust before filling (can be done in the fridge/freezer).
After Britten and Freeman explain this to Captain Harper, she tells them that an FBI agent who has been on the Gemini Killer case since its beginning will be flying in to join the investigation. We then meet the FBI agent, Elizabeth Santoro, on the phone with her ex-husband arguing about custody of their daughter. She tells Britten that she has been in Portland writing a book on the case, and that one detail of the murders they didn't make public was that the killer always left a two dollar bill in the victims hand. Since Britten's victim didn't have one, they definitely have a copycat killer. Britten asks her what Portland is like, and Santoro tells him it always rains, like London with hippies.
“Didn’t recognize you
Paper Plus' Group Marketing Manager, Lyle Hastings says he has been astounded by the success of the books and is committed to getting as many books out to those fans that cannot get them from their local public library.
We are what we repeatedly do. Excellence, then, is not an act, but a habit.
“We had some. All sold out. We have a very attractive model for our stuff, so it goes very quickly. @paradiseghirl88″
Before we go any further, I'm going to share a video of a Byrds' TV performance of "Eight Miles High" so you can refresh your recollection of the song. (Videos of old TV performances by rock bands are great because they let you see what the band looked like in performance but use the original studio recording of the music -- everyone lip-synched back then.)
Lisa runs her hands through her long hair.
In the early 1990s the United States and the European Community used the weakness of the post-Soviet Russian leadership to impose economic and cultural embargo on all of the three peripheral states. The model was copied partly from the regime of sanctions the West imposed on the Comecon since 1948, known under the abbreviation of “Cocom” (Coordinating Committee on Multilateral Export Controls) forbidding all Western firms to export “strategic” commodities into the Rouble zone. By the way: the “Cocom”-embargo against Moscow survived the overthrow of the communist regime in 1991. Officially it was transformed in 1995 to an new regime of trade regulations called Wassenaar agreement. But the embargo-policy continued. So IBM was sentenced to a fine of 9 millions of US-Dollars because of selling high-tech-computers to Russia – and in this case we speak of the year 1998.
How is everyone's December going? Is everyone's Christmas card making going good? Or are you all done with your cards?
Before our weekend kicks off, we're sneaking in ONE MORE with someone who's CREEPIN' up on the Farm...that's right! A new CREEPER CREW member,
They sell tickets for the tubing area in 2-hour blocks. We bought tickets for the 1:30 to 3:30 slot. After eating our lunch, we actually started tubing about 2 p.m., so we were on the tubing runs for an hour and a half. In that time, I think we probably flew down the hill about 7 times.
In between were rejuvenating conversations with my son and daughter-in-law, trips to the public library, thrift stores, and visits with friends. I also joined my daughter-in-law’s Ladies Choir and participated in one of their programs at a Rest Home for the elderly.
First, the disclaimer: I am not a lawyer. So take everything below with a grain of salt. Or two. However:
established unto you is because you’re acting on the Word; you’re taking your
The film then breaks down into the backdrop of all these events coming together,which makes the original event even more painful to take accept.
As you can see above, I chose three which never left their original plate hangers and got hung on my own wall in record time.
Put the grated apple and carrot into a large bowl along with the brown sugar, eggs, buttermilk and raisins, if using and mix thoroughly.
1. Slice the roll in three parts horizontally. Toast the bread lightly. To freshen store-bought rolls, I sprinkle them liberally with water, then place them in a hot toaster oven for 5-10 minutes. They are as good as new!
The band was writing a lot of original material and their manager John Ertl saw their talent and potential. So he started Streetwise Records with Nick Kuzulka, owner of Madison Street Studios in Waupun, which was 60 miles north of Milwaukee. Right before the newly formed label proposed making a Wigs album, Bob Pachner left the group. So Marty and Jim had to split the bass chores on the recordings. They spent days at a time in the studio, recording well into the night and sleeping on the office floor. The basic tracks themselves were all well-rehearsed and laid down very quickly, but it was the additions, such as backing vocals, piano, and horns that took a long time to complete.
Tip #4 Check for Ports
Poeta — a Buenos Aires street artist born Christian Riffel and a contributor to the walls of Juanele HQ — had put his initial plan on hold in order to organize Pop Up Galleries, the first in a series of artistic “interventions” in “unconventional” spaces. It was to be, he told me, “something very new” in a “very old house.”
My soul is full of wanting, and my heart is full of pain.
Best moment this week: Not sure.
Say if the banging doesn’t help
Love with no fear to love.
Some of the cruisers that we met are continuing on, and some, like us, have decided not to. To those who are continuing on we wish you safe sailing and many more fascinating experiences. The countries we visited and the local people that we met were always so inspiring. Where ever we went, we were greeted with big smiles and a request to have a picture taken with us. The people were so gracious and generous, and we always felt welcome. To those who are now landlubbers like us, we wish you the best.
I returned and horrors!! Matilda, my pet cat has spoiled my day.. Horrors.. The whole bottle was down and it was on the A4 sheet. My poem written in ink was lost in its creator. The bunch of A4, drank it all, the rich blend. My rich old wine.
A military mission from Morestra has also arrived to investigate. The culprit is revealed to be a creature from a universe of antimatter, retaliating for the removal by Sorenson of some antimatter samples from around the pit that acts as an interface between the two universes.
Thank you Lilley!
1/2 teaspoon baking powder
Worm
... okay.
Then, on the rare occasion that the van actually parked somewhere, the guy getting out had bad, green prison tattoos and that crazy Travolta-like smile.
The world is full of dreamers. Everyone knows people who woke up too late, only to discover that life had passed them by because they never did anything to make their dreams happen. They slept their life away, dreaming one day after another of doing something great, while those who faced reality were busy making their dreams happen.
And there we sat, all cuggled up (snuggle + cuddle= Anne’s word cuggle) on the couch with blankets and puppies and boxes of Girl Scout cookies and Adele singing to us, a private concert…a Happy Valentine’s Day. Maybe, after all these years, I am finally getting it.
CONTRA: The posts will always be of the same type kwIm? Traditionally Monday is Robp0rn Monday, Wednesday is Robp33n Wednesday and Friday is Anonymous Robcoholics Friday. Yes, we could change that up, but why fix something that is not necessarily broken?
15. Facetious and abstemious contain all the vowels in their correct order.
Let's get started. Step one? Mint oil.
And a weird wonderful thing happened this morning while I was putting this post together. Out of the corner of my ear I heard a teaser on the Today show, and there she was, Susanna Salk doing a fab segment about the book!
Oh, and thank god, NO MORE STUPID INVITATIONS! :D You know, those red enveloppes bouncing above your head…? I hated those.
But so was Jesus.
Environment and animals rights group, the World Wildlife Fund, says up to half of packaged foods found in supermarkets contain palm oil, including packet chips, cereals and soap.
Well it's amazing i've managed to leave a post 3 days in row! Today's card is a Tilda card i made for a very good crafting buddy's anniversary. I love this sweet stamp and think i will be using it for lots of different cards.
These are higher than any of my tango shoes, yet strangely just as comfortable as my most comfortable tango shoes (which are from Jorge Nel). I wore them all night Friday and Saturday night (finally trading them out for my dance slippers for my last tanda of the night when I was too tired to wear shoes of any kind) and had no pain, no blisters, no pinching.
On Jan. 21 from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., our friends at Salon Nfuse will host an all-day Cut-A-Thon, with 100% of proceeds benefiting HON (for the second year running!). The home of the official hair and makeup stylists for the 2011 CMA Music Festival is offering haircuts starting at $30 and up to $50, with owner Stephanie Trail providing cuts for $100. Appointments are available by calling (615) 649-0501. Be sure to specify your desired price point when making an appointment. Salon Nfuse is located at 2535 Franklin Pike, Suite 106.
Keeping them in the little plastic cups keeps them neat. The only thing I would do differently is to pipe out the whipped cream to make them prettier.
Because of all that awesomeness I'll not be posting a recipe for you guys tonight. I'll just leave you with some of the things I've been baking for the holidays. Hopefully you'll see some decorating ideas, or party treats that you can use this season!
My brother is a pastor of a church, and he recently wrote a book that I sincerely love. It isn’t because it is a masterpiece of wordplay. It is because in it, he chronicles the building of his church by fighting Satan in a real world setting. He talks about getting out in the real world and stealing from Satan what belongs to God. His church doesn’t put on a pious, religious front. They instead, are warriors, pillaging from Satan’s camp using every method they can think of. There aren’t great discussions on whether or not viewing Harry Potter is going to make everyone into a witch; there is a restaurant operated for the sole purpose of getting to know the people they hope to lead to the Lord. He talks about websites set up as the first taste of any church. He is fighting fire with fire.
Gini Cagle & Geri Freeman
What a better way to celebrate than to share some sneak peeks from this month's May Release which features the cutest baby stamps - all of which are available this Thursday, May 5th!!!
You have until February 3rd at noon CST to enter our current challenge, Anything Goes for Kids for a chance at three more awesome prizes from our generous sponsors. So come on and enter any card appropriate for a child and share in the fun at Send a Smile 4 Kids.
Lucious Lemon Meringue Pie (adapted from the Joy of Baking)
An innovative and extensive cocktail list features numerous variations on the Bloody Mary and the good old gin and tonic, made by the mad-scientist of a mixologist, Oscar, which can be sampled alongside the delicious, simple and authentic pizzas prepared by the passionate, bona fide Italian team.
Following My Paint Brush by Dulari Devi and Gita Wolf (Tara Books Pvt. Ltd, 2010). Following My Paint Brush is the story of Dulari Devi, a domestic helper who went on to become an artist in the Mithila style of folk painting from Bihar, eastern India (Grade 5 & under).
‘…doctor says his veins are clogged…’
Sitting down tends to be a posture that says, "I recieve. I rest" Maybe my constant producing and dis-taste for sitting has more to do with trust. Babyboy loves to do everything for himself. At thirty-something I still like to do everything myself. When I sit, I can't produce. I have to trust someone else to do, to produce, and to provide for me.
The two Italian beat scientists Colossius and UXO have come together to form Agents of Decay, a sound experiment akin to a distant broadcast of some sort of post-apocalyptic radio show, that somehow got filtered through Europe in the 80's before being picked up on the emergency radio that you were hoping to hear important news on.
No, I didn’t have an editor, but I did use lots of critical friends and used the pupils in my class to test out the books. I also had the great Herbie Brennan, best selling international author of Faerie Wars. I sent the first book to him and he loved it. He gave me a lovely quote to put on the front cover - wonderful accolade that no editor could have provided.
with the Americans.”
Serendipity 7 is my venture with my soul friend, Marcie. It is all things vintage, up cycled and good. I love it....we are getting ready for our first vintage sale on April 21st....this is working for me. I am loving everything about it! Time with my soul friend, a new challenge, creating awesomeness.
My shins were hurting and it was time to get all Dr Google on their ass.
“Even a Child is known by his deeds”. Proverbs 20:11
Then Detective Martin White attempted to clear up the mystery of the woman in white.
With all of the inner battles he’s going through he decides to keep on working at the hospital because he has an unlimited supply of blood whenever he needs it, but Sang-hyun is slowly drifting away from his faith and the church. Which all starts when he’s reunited with Kang-woo (Shin Ha-kyun) who he hasn’t seen since he was a child when they used to play together. Kang-woo is admitted to the hospital because of a serious illness, and Kang-woo’s eccentric and emasculating mother finds out that the “bandaged saint” is working there and hunts him down to pray for her son. During the prayer she recognizes him from when he used to come over and play as a boy, and after a brief conversation they invite him over to play their favorite game Mahjong (which I think is something like the card game rummy). So when he comes over one night he also sees Tae-ju (Kim Ok-bin), the girl he used to play with who’s now Kang-woo’s wife, but she lives in a miserable situation with her bratty and spoiled husband and her mother-in-law who baby’s him constantly but treats her like a dog. Sang-hyun unexpectedly starts to fall for her, and soon the two of them sneak off and have an affair which becomes an ongoing thing. So much so that Tae-ju tells her mother-in-law she wants to volunteer at the hospital helping the needy so they can keep seeing each other. And this is the beginning of the turning point for Sang-hyun, because he is still holding on to some semblance of faith. But when Tae-ju finds out he’s a vampire she’s terrified of him, which is the breaking point for Sang-hyun’s faith that causes him completely embrace his vampire side and turn away from God and the church. Then once Tae-ju has had some time to think things over she becomes fascinated with him and once again wants to spend all her time with him. Luckily that is an easy thing to do because her family takes him in after he renounces his faith.
Well, here’s the answer: making my 2013 bird of prey calendar.
i have never seen her so happy.
And if that idea – the idea that intercollegiate teams are made up of beginner through advanced riders – doesn’t blow your mind, try this one on for size: At the end of many intercollegiate horse shows, a team’s chances at overall victory often come to rest on the shoulders of their walk-trot rider(s).
I feel that we have both learned a lesson from this. Or rather we should have learned a lesson. But we probably haven’t.
Paper: Cosmo Cricket: Clementine, PTI cardstock
On this day in 2005, then President Gloria Macapagal-Arroyo admitted to calling a Comelec official (whom she did not identify) during the May 2004 presidential elections. She called it a “lapse in judgment” and apologized for it.
ABV = 6.0%
5 Seasick Steve - Never Go West
"The science has moved on considerably," from Martin Mackay, Pfizer's head of research and development.
The website also states that, “the original appearance of the station is not recorded, but it is known to have been smaller and simpler in form than the present building. A second storey was added in 1876 after the Grand Trunk Railway openly assumed management, and the station was remodelled in 1900 to its present form”. This is only a drop in the bucket when it comes to the history of this train station and its current status, but I hope that these photos will take you on a journey that might spark your imagination as to what it was like to ride the rails in the 1800′s.
I wanted to adhere the flower over the seam, but since that was going to be uneven, I knew the adhesion would not be very secure.
Spring is so close!
- chopped fresh cilantro to taste
He alleged that his arrest and detention were tainted with malice.
This unwillingness to try something new that would save her time in the present and could potentially be useful to her in the future. This made me think long and hard about information literacy and an open mind. We talk about resource evaluation and computer literacy and social software, but in the end an open mind is the most important thing we can cultivate in our students. Without the willingness to question, experiment, and adapt, our students will not be able to apply information literacy skills outside of the assignments we give them. When I revise my teaching philosophy for my e-portfolio, I will include my ideas on how to promote this openness in the classroom.
3.I Put A Spell On You - 02:42
"Alright, you da boss. Anyway, common you gonna play yer hand or what?" answered the brown haired man.
I have been feeling pretty good lately. I am nearing the end of my third week of working out and it feels really good to be active again. I think without exercising, those dreaded baby blues would creep in. For the most part, I don't think I am having much, if any, post-partum depression. There are times when I still struggle with things, especially when I hear about other people losing their babies or about little ones that are sick. But, I think that is to be expected. I think when you lose a child, hearing about others who are facing the same thing affects you differently than it does if you haven't suffered a loss.
David Wagoner
But this is not to say that Coronation Street doesn’t have its own problems. First of all, it’s downright appalling that a working class show in 1979 would have an all white cast. Coronation Street doesn’t get its first black major character until 1983, two years after Toxteth. While some defense can be mounted on the grounds that Coronation Street is set in a fictional Salford, which is not a very racially diverse part of Greater Manchester, the fact of the matter is that a depiction of working class Britain consisting entirely of white people is... troubling. And yes, the same criticism can be made of Doctor Who in this time period, but for Doctor Who that’s just a reiteration of the complaint that it’s entirely middle and upper class. For Coronation Street, it’s something else.
Wow alot has happen since I wrote last. I am planning surgery for my complete srs and breasts which is needed hehe, too small on top. I will keep you all in touch as my hair is now growing back.
Only let me know your holy and true will.
the police department). And if you wish to wander in foreign lands,
I recently went to see an applied kinesiologist. He told me that the Cod Liver oil wasn't what my body wanted or needed...so I'm now taking a DHA. My body apparently LOVES the Bio Kult probiotics. I was also put on a Riboflavin (vitamin b), which makes my urine fluorescent yellow and a molybdenum. I will say that I will finish out the bottles, but not buy more. I researched molybdenum online and it isn't something that people are usually short on. In very rare cases there is a deficiency. I've been super sleepy, and coincidentally, over usage of molybdenum causes sleepiness.
May mercy, peace and love be mine in full measure in Christ Jesus, Amen!
There is NO WAY I'm letting my son catch a glimpse at the ridiculous room Chris at Just a Girl created for her son. I just know that he'd somehow convince me it was time for another room makeover. So I'll just quietly drool over her masterpiece by myself.
I'm not against bringing the rich and their tax receipts downtown, but let's leave the ones who don't have enough taste to avoid this 31-story doo doo log to Williamson County.
f) The budget focused on prisons would be revised so that more money could be spent on higher education –i.e. as of right now the state of California spends $8,667 per student per year, while nearly $50,000 per inmate per year.
I realise there are many jobs where jobsharing may not be practical, but equally so there are many where it could work very well. With continuing population growth, plus the fact that people are living 10 – 20 years longer, it is clear that business and job creation alone, cannot keep up. With jobs declining worldwide, making the most of what is available is a viable option. We need to reinvent the daily working wheel.
Oranges! are very sweet like
This is what I am planning this year but I may change my mind depending on what you share. I can't wait to see your gift ideas!
I don't wanna come across as to ungrateful or to rude.
I did some more studio work today, so in a few days, I have some more photos of what is finishing up and what is getting started.
“To a degree, literary taste is a subjective matter. One can admire a work of fiction without particularly enjoying it; one can dislike a novel even while appreciating its value. In the case of Erin Morgenstern’s first novel, The Night Circus, I might well have been the wrong reviewer. As a reader, I am resistant to historical fiction. I am hostile to whimsy, and beyond impatient with the fantastical.”
artaculous.com covers all kinds of art and especially the following categories:
For my 8th birthday a sewing basket, I put the toys away for a while.Again this one was Kez's idea.She never left craft, I'm only just getting back into it...funny that...we just found each other after 30 years....she's still influencing me !!! If Kerri jumped into the fire would you???? my mother said this a lot.But...she has all the good ideas.
I love the CD this song is from. I remember a couple years ago listening to this CD, and this song in particular, as we drove around my grandparents' subdivision in Michigan, looking at all the beautiful Christmas lights after our family Christmas. I felt so blessed to know that I have a family like the one described here...and that I always have had one. I didn't have to wait. I had such a family from the very beginning. I am blessed.
Stayin’ In…Bobby Vee
Not only did I love the old tool crate that the door hardware was snuggled in, look at that awesome door hardware! They would look awesome lined up in a giant shadow box frame as art, or on actual doors!
The solution is actually quite simple.
Last Saturday I went with two other seniors to the Powell Gardens. It is 915 acres of gardens, some still undeveloped, but we spent nearly 5 hours there just wandering. This is the hot house where this orange tree is growing. There were banana trees, lime tree, tangerine tree,
Starting with Windows Server 2008 and Windows Vista with Service Pack 1 (SP1), Windows Error Reporting (WER) can be configured so that full user-mode dumps are collected and stored locally after a user-mode application crashes. Applications that do their own custom crash reporting, including .NET applications, are not supported by this feature.
I debated for a long time about whether to get a GPS watch. On one hand, I liked running without a lot of stuff. On the other hand, I knew that GPS watches can be very useful training devices. When I was training for the 2012 Oakland Half Marathon, I initially used the RunKeeper app on my iPhone, which I found to be pretty handy especially as my runs got longer. One downside, though, was that it meant carrying my iPhone on every run that I wanted to track. Oh, and another was that I couldn’t take a quick peek at the data without stopping, getting my phone out of my Spibelt, and unlocking it. So, after a little bit of internal debate, I decided to take the plunge and get a GPS watch.
AND NO-ONE DID, shock horror
Allen is also set to discuss our progress with Afghan security forces. He will talk about provinces handed over to Afghan control and the successes of our allies, who have deployed tens of thousands of troops to the fight.
I have seen a draft copy of the exhaust positioning rules. These rules are still subject to change because of an ongoing Technical Working Group (TWG) discussion to refine the rules. Ross Brawn in particular has made comments about possible loopholes in these regs.
8)Frequently remembering Allaah (Dhikr) which includes regularly reciting the Adhkar especially in the mornings and evenings
In so many ways, Obama displays his disdain for those who both voted for and against him. America has never had a President that didn’t like it and, in November 2012, voters will have the opportunity to return the feeling.
He was one of the few people I could shut up around, simply because I knew he didn't need me to say a damned thing.
So just think of me and send a good wish.
However, a major problem with these guidelines is that, all too often, they are presented not as an ideal but as an absolute upper limit, above which the drinker falls off a cliff of risk. In fact, as pointed out by CAMRA in their submission to the inquiry, even taking the figures at face value, you need to exceed them by a considerable margin before there is anything more than a slight increase in the risk level. There is a wide gap between the recommended limit and the point where drinking is likely to have a severe health impact.
There are problems, you see. And no easy fix. The seat bolt is stripped and immoveable and needs to be drilled out. But it’s impossible to access it with a from underneath. Normally this might mean just sawing it off (and replacing the seatpost.)
Step 7 (In Which Meet Cream And Cheese): Now the cream gets folded into the mascarpone cheese (which was mixed with a few other things that I now forget). I folded this beautifully, if I may boast a bit. In between Steps 6 & 7, the Penguins grew frustrated by the lack of tiramisu in their lives and allowed 4 goals in 15 minutes of play. I did not allow my anger to disrupt my smooth folding technique.
Bring about 2 inches of water to a boil in a wide skillet. Reduce the heat to medium-low so the water is barely simmering.
Now, will you join my crusade to eradicate Margarita Dermatitis? I’m already training for the first annual 10K. Who’s in?
This is one that I do put into a lot of my fiction, but I try to be very careful with how I use it and what words I use exactly. I know some writers wont use any swear words what so ever in their work and I can understand that. I have work that I wont use adult language in because I’d like all ages to be able to read it, but I want my work, generally, to be as realistic as I can make it. I know that we all would like to think that people don’t use these words but in real life we all do (believe me I do) so why should we hide it in what we write? In my Vampire short story series I don’t hold anything back at all, that includes violence but I have held back from graphic sex scenes, but I’ll talk about those in a minute. This Vampire series is probably my most realistic writing that I’ve done so far so bad language is a big part of it because a lot of the characters come from worlds where language is used to its most obscene. This is why I think it feels authentic because I don’t hold back with things like bad language. In other things that I’ve written I’ve deliberately avoided putting in any swear words which has been great for exercising my vocabulary and can be really frustrating.
I specifically noted the Mighty Nest information because anytime I hear “endocrine disruptor” red flags go up! Our endocrine system is directly linked to our Chakras! Let me catch you up to speed as to why that matters:
TY: What was the take away?
So obviously, again, Paul’s reference here is to worshippers drawn into the ever-present danger of idolatry, one danger of which is unbridled sexual licentiousness of the kind that a conservative Jew like Paul would have found abhorrent. Especially when seen against his mission to the Roman Empire, with its endless parade of cults and religions, and very lax sexual behaviour generally.
As you've grown older, your interests have narrowed. Books. Dolls. Girlie things.
Earlier this morning Andrew Savikas of O’Reilly shared some information about the volume of ebooks being sold from their web site. It’s useful for us to note that the sales Andrew talked about take place in the context of consumers accessing the O’Reilly brand direct from the corporate web site(and not purchasing via resellers). It is time for us to think less about unit margin and much more about our overall brand value.
Here's how: follow my blog and leave a comment stating so, follow my TpT store and leave a comment stating so, and blog about my giveaway on your blog and leave a comment with your link. That's it!
She was one of the world’s best-selling artists in the 1980s and 1990s. She had recorded 12 albums from 1985 to 2009, selling more than 170 million copies.
3. Damages the adrenals, blood vessels, breasts, brain, gastrointestinal tract, DNA, immune system and bones.
We were impressed with the presentation of the dish, as the parfait was made to resemble a real cherry, cute right?
*takes deep breath* onward I go…
Well I suppose if you're genetically predisposed to hate spoilers I've already told you too much - don't hate the player, hate the game. According to a blog dedicated to "Lost" spoilers, PKD's ultimate novel of self-exploration, VALIS, will be featured in episode four of the upcoming fourth season. Argentian author Adolfo Bioy Casares’s The Invention of Morel will also be featured in an episode titled "Eggtown" set to air February 21st.
between the air
Hi Readers — The other day, a toddler at an Applebee’s was accidentally served alcohol instead of juice. It’s appalling — the mom said she knew something weird was going on when he started saying “Hi!” to the walls — but the bottom line is: The child was unharmed and this was one single incident. In fact, it was an incident so modest and local, it is bizarre that it made the news. It’s not like this was a terrorist attack. It was one stupid mistake. But as a result, Applebee’s went into OMG mode (probably out of fear of lawsuits as well as bad publicity) and from now on, it says, it will re-train all its employees and use only SINGLE SERVE juice drinks.
One of my favorite snacks is popcorn, so when I saw this churro popcorn, it called my name! And then it said, "make me...now". Luckily for me, I actually had cinnamon chips in the house, so I was able to quickly whip up a batch. While the popcorn is obviously a different texture than an authentic churro, the flavor is definitely there. This was great snack, and was perfect for our movie night!
Time in the NICU: 150 days
I want to suggest that you attempt to rid as many processed and packaged foods from your diet as possible, and replace them with a diet replete with natural foods. By natural foods, I mean food that humans evolved to benefit from: fruits, vegetables, some whole grains and meat from animals that are fed grass (not grains and antibiotics). To eat this way requires making a commitment to shop smart and to cook smart. These are both challenging and exciting activities that might help you organize an emotionally satisfying life beyond the grasp of your sugar addiction.
The goals of these"Peaceful Patriots"and their"New World Order", knee-jerking their way to anarchy, is underlined in red by their blatant disrespect for our American Flag.
Price: $16.99, 608 pages
10. More recent surveys reveal that a mere 850,000 hectares of virgin old-growth rainforests are left, barely 2.8% of the entire land mass of the Philippine archipelago and about 3.0 million hectares of immature and uneconomical secondary growth forests.
Food'n'drink were great, too. There's nothing like drinking coffee from a tin mug and eating peach cobbler while listening to Don Edwards over on the Main Stage.
There’s nothing like staring down 25 years of debt to suddenly imbue someone with the irrational belief that they’ll get the winning ticket. After laughing at my Father for buying Lotto tickets, I’m one step away from doing it myself (scratchies are a gateway drug, kind of like the marijuana of gambling). Apparently I’m more likely to be struck by lightning or become infected by malaria – but it doesn’t matter. The precious will be mine!
When you’ve a moment, search your mind archives and see what unique time recordings you have stored away.
But, is that really true? In Josh Beckett’s mind, I suspect, he’s worked his butt off at this game. He’s pitched through pain. He’s delivered in big moments. He was the pitching force behind Boston’s World Series. He’s endured the pains of the game -- the slumps, the boos, the insults, the injuries. So he doesn’t want to sit in the dugout every stinking minute of every game … so he wants to take his mind off things on his day off by playing a little golf … so he doesn’t have the talent to entertain reporters and doesn’t feel like making the game look like it’s the most fun he’s ever had in his entire life … so he doesn’t want to perform Seppuku every time the Red Sox lose a game …
The Rules are simple: Make a project that uses a digital image and stick with the challenge theme. The prize is three PMS images of your choice (FIVE if your winning project has a PMS digi on it)!!
o Think it through: May wish to play through the “what if?” scenarios to remind yourself that you have options or that the situation won’t be as dire once as you thought.
Riva raised her eyebrows. “You don’t believe in their power?”
Wow, today has been an incredible day. I guess I better start with last night to get to today... Last night at around 11:00 PM I went to my next door neighbor's house (she happens to be one of my very best friends) because she was having some landlord issues. Well needless to say, we were both upset and in horrible moods, but then the conversation shifted to spirituality and illness and the relation and honest to God, for a brief instant I felt no pain at all. I started crying because it was so foreign to me to have that feeling! It has been approx. 3 years since I have felt what it feels like to have zero pain. I couldn't believe it! We decided right then and there that we are going to be grateful for the blessings we have and we are going to be thankful for our trials and tribulations because without them, we wouldn't learn. We wouldn't grow as human beings... as spiritual beings. I was (I think I can speak for us both here) totally swept away with feelings of pure love and light and I could see her aura getting brighter and brighter by the minute. Normally I can't see aura's, but I could see my friend's! It was incredible.
Savitz DA, Arbuckle T, Kaczor D, Curtis KM. Male pesticide exposure and pregnancy outcome. Am J Epidemiol 1997; 146: 1025-1036.
It does look like Mario stole Luigi's clothes, but she was ecstatic about it, and that's all that matters.
I could see his infectious smile long before he ran to our waiting car. He was absolutely beaming. I couldn't imagine what had made my boy so happy.
*light khaki Gymboree pants: $1
So ... H is in hospital, B is both physically and mentally sick and L is making himself scarce. In the evening, I stay home, glued to the radio. The Prime Minister's office (just who the Prime Minister is at this point is a question not addressed) states,
Dijana
- Several Frittata, Chicken with Eggplant & Tomato Puree, & Jamon Iberico & Squash,
When in Rome . . .
Level 20: MP Cost: 50, Duration: 600 seconds, All Stats: +10%.
Do they pack just necessities? Do they pack in excess?
Navy blue blouse: thrifted
This Three Peas in a Pod necklace by Sudlow is the perfect gift for a mom with three kids. The pod is handmade and there are several different versions so your mom can get exactly what she's looking for!
She majorly offended my husband, when I asked her over she said ‘could your husband assemble some flatpack for me?’. I asked my husband who was offended by the assumption that I couldn’t do this for her. It’s sexist he said to make such assumptions. I am reminded that I have built furniture from scratch with wood. I offer to help. No she says, there are little nails to hold the back in place it requires finesse with the hammering. I really want your husband to do it. He is offended that she thinks he would marry someone who cannot assembly Ikea flatpack.
When I started writing and working in stage/film, I started using pseudonyms. You know what? They stuck. I was never attempting to fool anyone – they often knew my real name as well – but when word gets out that you want to be credited as “Dirk Stairfighter” people take notice.
Index No. 05CV7046(LAP)
Dane kept tickling me; he seemed to have realized I was quite ticklish there. I was almost lying down and he was kneeling over me.
If the authorities were never wrong, the world would still be flat, with the sun circling around it, and we would still be dunking witches.
Sunday
5-8 Dry Red Chilli, broken (I used Byadagi, adjust acc to taste)
The movie was in danger of being quite hard to watch, as the story line is quite brutal, but they found a way of making sure you understood that lots of people were dying without being in your face about it.
Did you linger in libraries when you were an emerging writer, Mr. Pullman?
Ali’s supervisor, Social Services Director Sarah Wheeler said, “Ali fit right in, the transition was seamless. She learns so quickly she makes the job look easy. She’s been here just over a month, but it feels like she’s been here for a long time.”
"You might think that," he said, "But that's what's so great about grapes. They thrive on adversity, on the water rolling down the hill in a hard storm, on the wind whipping through. Think of the vineyards back in France. Can you think of a single one that's on flat land?"
The California Grill is not a value option by any stretch when it comes to dining at Walt Disney World, where starters can range from $10-$20 and main courses can be anywhere from $25-$50. Add in a glass of wine or two and dessert (or two) and this can certainly add up. However, the quality and variety of food, the service and Disney magic, not to mention the prime viewing of Magic Kingdom’s fireworks make this a dining experience that you won’t soon forget and will continue to return to upon future visits. If you happen to be dining with the Disney Dining Plan, the California Grill is considered a ‘Signature’ dining option, and thus requires 2 table service credits.
Never No More Blues
If you are not testing, then how would you like to test your apps if given the opportunity?
I don’t know anyone who likes tax increases, but having bad schools would cost our community a lot more than the $400/year per household if our school system collapses.
it doesn’t rain
And here's a text that made me love him even more, but it might make you sick. I'd apologize for sharing it, but I'm not sorry:
The doorbell rings. Flowers from my Tom arrive.
Dear Beer (Both Craft and Domestic),
Interior Minister Anna Maria Cancellieri also said on Sunday that she was considering bringing in the army to defend certain locations.
The truth God is trying to tell me is…..
Michelle here. I am excited to share with you another project I made with the Be Amazing kit and add-on. I think this is my favorite kit yet!! I just love the soft, calming color palette. It has fit so well with some family photos that I have scrapped thus far.
Grip – To get your right elbow in the proper position during your swing, grip your left wrist with your right hand from underneath. Doing this will help you maintain more width and extension, as well as enlarging your swing circle and ascending angle to get more club head speed and start seeing the golf ball go higher and farther.
Tristan set down his pack and rested his precious lute on the bench the gatekeeper hauled near. He looked around himself as he removed his sodden cloak and spread it over the bench to dry. The hall was a strange mixture of opulence and squalor. Rich tapestries hung from the walls, but they were dark with years of soot from the smoking hearth. Elaborately carved wooden pillars, thick as the trunks of ancient trees, held up the high, smoke-blackened, heavy-beamed roof far above him. Where most halls were draped and decked with yuletide greenery this time of year: mistletoe, ivy and holly, this hall lacked any sign of the coming celebration of Christ’s birth. Torches blazed along the soot-stained walls.
It seems that 2012 is the year of new things and letting go of old things. I'll let go of the chemotherapy and say hello to new hair. My lovely daughter will leave her lovely school and set off for sixth form. And I will be letting go of the novel I've been working on for years, to start work on something completely new.
But like all rules, there are exceptions. When things are not what they seem, I believe it is important to explain why. During the Erasmus Commission for example, people advised me to stop talking about the matter because I was merely playing into the hands of those trying to smear me.
(First, I need to apologize for a few things. I’m purposefully vague in my description of corporate/qorporate happenings. I can’t risk dismissal, as three tuitions rely on my pay, and I want to leave on my own terms, not theirs. Hopefully you get the gist of what is going on, and maybe you’ll relate better if I am a bit oblique. Secondly, I’m starting to be bored with my qorporate rants, so I plan to take a break from them ASAP. However, a story is in the making…)
In the first place, nobody else but God would ever have thought of justifying those who are guilty. They have lived in open rebellion; they have done evil with both hands; they have gone from bad to worse; they have turned back to sin even after they have smarted for it, and have therefore for a while been forced to leave it. They have broken the law, and trampled on the gospel. They have refused proclamations of mercy, and have persisted in ungodliness. How can they be forgiven and justified? Their fellowmen, despairing of them, say, “They are hopeless cases.” Even Christians look upon them with sorrow rather than with hope. But not so their God. He, in the splendour of his electing grace having chosen some of them before the foundation of the world, will not rest till He has justified them, and made them to be accepted in the Beloved. Is it not written, “Whom he did predestine, them he also called: and whom he called he also justified: and whom he justified, them he also glorified”? Thus you see there are some whom the Lord resolves to justify: why should not you and I be of the number? (“All of Grace”)
Some have said it is strange that I still live in the same town where I grew up. Some would also say that it is strange that I attended a university in the same city where I grew up. Some would say that it is really strange that I work at the university I attended in the city I grew up. I say that it’s just me being true to myself and having a strong sense of personal pride.
This pattern was evident at the FeelGood kiosk last week when we featured the ‘PB and Gender,’ a sandwich containing nutella, peanut butter, and banana slices.
And a tight fastened lip
“At the risk of patronising them, many weren’t born or were too young to appreciate just how dire the beer scene was in the early 1970’s. The likes of Watney’s Red, Worthington E and Double Diamond were spreading like some dreadful bacillus across the country. Breweries were either closing or switching to keg production.”
Another favorite was Bistro LQ - which offered up two exquisite dishes - the tenderest, addictively-flavored Braised Ox Cheek on Grits, and Wild Hare Terrine with pickled huckleberries (I think they ran out of stuffed duck neck which was to accompany the dish, at that point?) Again my inner glutton overtook the blogger - suffice it to say I would have eaten these all day if I could!
I don’t exactly know what lies ahead, but I’m excited for the adventures.
Treasure the patches of deepest shade, the terrain of ancient, towering trees.
Of course if they were real our history would have been re-written long ago , but rumours and people's beliefs cloud our judgement some times ( not all of us though ! )
****Abbreviation for "Dungeon Master," the game participant who leads the "players" through their adventures. The DM is sort of like a rules referee and story narrator all in one.
We make a big deal about pregnancy and birth, but not nearly so much about gestation. The Maya tzolkin calendar is 260 days long, and approximates the length of human gestation, the time we are in the watery darkness of the womb, becoming. The moment of birth is the moment of emergence into the world, when we take our first breath.
Premature ejaculate should be flicked over your left shoulder.
Well I didn't tell her that she was waisting her time.
Audrey is definitely experiencing the ups and downs of sisterhood. She can be totally enjoying Abigail one minute, then fending her off the next. She does not want Abigail around her creations. We're trying to teach her to give Abigail a toy to play with to distract her. But more often than not all we hear is, "Abby, no! Mom, come get Abby, she's getting my stuff!" A couple of times we've caught her dragging Abby away by the pant legs (sooo funny!)
Skin - E0000, 000, 00, 11 and chalk for cheeks
Gommage treatment with enzyme & yogurt to exfoliate and nourish complexion and remove oil, dirt and excess.
While the traditional camel color is classic, I love the updated colors and embellishments (the chunky studs on the Proenza Schouler bag make me swoon as does the price on the red hot iguana version!) You can still get a neutral color, but spring is the time to bring a fun, bright color as well!
Vancouver – Almost Third Wave with the new bike deck on the Canada Line Bridge over the Fraser River. Depending on the route you choose, a combination of bike routes, bike lanes, and a bike path on the airport property gets you to the terminal. There are sections missing. Leaving the airport, bike lanes get you to the river.
Why do I keep doing this shit to myself?! Why the don’t I just become an agoraphobe and never leave my house. Every time I get in that damn tin can of despair known as public transportation, something happens that makes me lose even more faith in humanity. I started out with no faith. I now have a negative million and six faith units of faith, a unit of measurement I invented just to give you a tangible figure for my plight. That’s a lot of faith units lost thanks to a bunch of poor fucks on wheels.
I walked further down the yard into the sunshine.
Disc Three (2002): “After the War”
4. i am use to having a table to myself when i design so i get a little anxiety having to share in such close quarters with others
‘Hmmm, okay we’ll fix it.’
"A schedule is for the days when life doesn't happen." (I hope I accurately quote.)
The Handsome Family
Christian has waited to take her, resisting the urge each night. It always ends badly with human pets. They’re too fragile. The longer he can wait, the better, because the moment he takes her, the clock on her life starts ticking down.
After three continuous days of packing and hauling and pinched fingers and mild, stifled cursing we locked our dorm room door and now I ache.
In case the scapular needs to be washed in the future, I've placed the medals inside a very small, plastic click-lock bag. Next time I will place one of the medals on one side of the scapular, and the other with the St Anthony's Brief, rather than having the two medals together. The medals have been blessed, with the St Benedict's medal receiving the special blessing it needs.
Bottoms Up, Pledgers.
all hidden now in an abyss
I wanted to take a few minutes and tell you a few things about this blog, a review if you will. First things first this blog is run by a gentleman by the name of M.D. Creekmore. As I understand it he is a prolific author having published several books on preparedness and self sufficiency. I have not yet had the opportunity to read his books, but judging by his blogging I would guess that they are very informative and well written.
The pocket thing: let's face it, jingling some beads in your pocket is just as satisfying a sound as jangling some solid gold coins for making you feel like a wealthy pirate.
Faithful and freeze-proof Dianthus ‘chinensis’. I mention the complete name because there are other Dianthus cultivars, and they don’t perform the same as ‘chinensis’. The tall ones will grow for a season if planted as a large plant and occasionally, they return for a second season, but I couldn’t get ‘Sweet William’ seeds to grow, and I’ve never seen 99-cent 4” plants for sale – only the $7 or $8 plants.
durmaitrāś chadma-veśiṇaḥ
2. I launched a new audiobook series. I am narrating my own stories in a series of audiobook chapters. During this "figure it out" phase, we're serializing one of my short stories, the Booke Cases mystery "Don't Fall For That Trick." We have a fun summer replacement series scheduled, and then I'm hoping this fall to come back with an audiobook version of one of my novels—I just haven't decided yet which one.
My Dad calmly responded, "Gee that's interesting. Mind if I call him myself?"
That cottage was a lifesaver for me that summer of 2001. No matter what transpired during the week, I’d look forward to the weekends at the cottage and I’d leave early on the Friday from work, leave the shop in the hands of my employees for a few hours until closing and couldn’t wait to get there. I’d unload everything with my son helping, got the groceries put away, then I’d make myself a nice cold drink and head out to the deck and just let the whispering white pines, the view of the lake and the sunshine do their magic. I’d put some music on, watch the sun reflect across the water and just be so thankful I’d been introduced to this place. It truly was magical!
You can teach me lots of lessons
4-Kyle Gibson-Naperville (North)-14:23
Friday was The Oldest's 11th Birthday, and in true fashion asked for a Happy Hour Play Date as a party. Earlier that day, I worked in the classroom and led Destination Imagination Instant Challenges after school. So we had 5 of his friends over, a couple of their siblings, and all of their moms. The kids played and ran around and had fun, and the moms sat around, visited and drank. The party started at 4:00, and ended past 10:00. I had too much to drink and slept like the dead...
The other things I hate are the platitudes that people only use for a miscarriage. I don't blame anyone for saying these things, it's what I would have said and thought before this happened to me. To someone who has never experienced the loss of a wanted pregnancy, the idea that it feels the same as a death sounds melodramatic and odd. How could you equate losing a tiny ball of cells in your uterus to losing a fully grown child? Until you've been pregnant, you can't understand how instantly attached and bonded a mother becomes to her child, however small and new that life is. We love it, make plans for it, dream about how it will look, sound, and act. We cradle our bellies and smile thinking of the budding life we're helping to nurture and protect. It's not just a ball of cells or a tiny little fetus, it's our child, our baby, already as important to us and loved as a child is to any parent.
During this free webinar, you’ll learn practical tips on how to develop professionally and personally while interning at a public interest office this summer. Also, you’ll get insider advice from public interest attorneys and community leaders.
I enjoyed the aspect of this story it was different to all the other books that I have read. The writing was easy to read and flowed off the page with ease. The characters were all well rounded and I did enjoy reading Carmen’s story, she was easy to relate to and she also grew throughout the book. I also loved how the story ended, it ended in just the right place for me and by that point I really like Jeremy and Carmen’s romance.
flow efficiency.
"Jesus," Peggy said, with a palm to her forehead. "You're going to get a phone call any minute from a customer asking, 'Why did you just text me and ask where the nearest whorehouse is?' "
It brought with it a magical eve full of excitement and anticipation.
grumble...mumble..."Okay, let me get to work..."
**Footnote: This is a picture that proves:
As mentioned some of the filling out was done with the coil of cables. I also added another pouch between the coil and armour plate, made in the same basic way as the one made for the front of the body, described in the body post. The opening is here hanging to one side and I also added the ends of a string. This was made with a thin length of greenstuff, which as far as I remember I folded halfway along and attached to the neck of the pouch at that point.
No point in hanging about admiring the plumbing and the rigging - off we go. We head southwards along the coast of Corfu - seeing our eventual destination, Paxos, in the the far distance. We then turn east and over the Ionian to mainland Greece where will moor overnight at Plataria.
“Kinda like purple,” the boy opined.
You see, there was no time after the late Fifties when he wasn’t on TV, and even though the programs were thin wisps of nothing (there’s not much overhead on a bloopers show, is there?), he continued to hang around the dial as he raked in millions. The notion of him retiring was untenable, even when he really needed to exit the public stage,
are invited on issues related to any of the
Isn't it just brilliant that more and more people choose to celebrate this night with family and friends, house parties, intimate dinners or a chilled one with a bottle of fizz and Jools on the box. It was the millennium what did it I tells ya. The overpriced tickets for pubs, clubs and restaurants (where you could puff and huff your way to midnight with the crowds fighting to get served before the bell tolled) shone a big old beam of light on how silly it all was when you can have twice as much fun at home for half the price. Who wants to spend half the night queuing to get your coat in the cloakroom and the other half queuing to get it out again? Nah, stay home and use the bed (to dump coats on of course)...tut.
Wishing you a creative week, wherever you are!
Level 9: MP Cost: 30, Damage: 334%, Attacks up to 6 enemies.
Here are some other hairstyles that I've pinned..
9-They love us unconditionally!
Paper: crumb cake, night of navy (SU), heavenly white (PaperTemptress), designer paper (Kaisercraft)
I’m not a sweets person, although I love ice creams, chocolates, and brownies, I find myself looking for pastry with light creams/filling to balance the sweet sugary taste that most bakeshops or boutiques seem to be doing to compensate for cutting down on the flavor elements. That’s when I discovered cream puffs. So just like my sisig obsession where I would order sisig from any restaurant that offers them just so I could compare, I also try out different cream puffs just to see how each one would fare against the others. This reminds me, I should do a cream puff review… (*jots down a reminder*). Looking at SM Mall of Asia’s restaurant directory (which is now a board printout placed on top of the touch screen…?), we came across the name “Chewy Junior”, and it immediately sparked our interest.
Stopping Fakes at China’s Trade Fairs: New Regulations and Initiatives Aimed at Protecting Intellectual Property Rights for Patents, Trademarks and Copyrights at Trade Fairs in ChinaCommerce Department Market Access and Compliance Division leads a discussion of best practices for protecting IP at Trade Fairs in China covering China’s new regulations and US initiatives.-October 12, 2006 2:00pm-3:30pm EST "Download Here"
Some of the best responses that really touched me were:
My closest, closest friends are masters of giving me space even if we have to share a room, or the same zip code. But they also tend to be people who need to have me time, and they don’t compromise it, because it’s a priority to them.
Being of bigger frame, I find my hip-and-shoulder technique tends to be quite effective. This means I can get to where I need to go with out fear of being trampled on, and simultaneously barrage my way through. It also means that people GTFO of my way when they see me running through. It’s kind of like being a Trojan horse… without being made of wood and filled with 100 men all wanting to kill someone.
and the smell of fresh spring earth.
Remember, these were His disciples who had affirmed their loyalty in Matthew 26:35. “Peter said unto him, Though I should die with thee, yet will I not deny thee. Likewise also said all the disciples.” Yet in the last part of this same chapter, Peter denied him three times.
I think the most enlightening thing one learns as a writer is “if you build it, they won’t necessarily come.” No matter how passionate you are about your story, it doesn’t mean anyone else will be. One of my first bookstore readings had 6 people in the audience and one was my publisher and one was the dude who set it up. Ego check.
COMPARISON SHOPPING: Jane’s Journey
There’s a trade-off, with generating needed energy. Infrastructure is for the greater good. You will devastate some land, some species, some livelihoods. Local input may be ignored in the U.S., too. But from what I can tell, China, with rule-of-law and regulatory problems, with a centralized regime and yet many overlapping bureaucracies, where the rural poor have little power, the situation is much worse.
Often rape is used as a means of control, or shaming, of either a woman or her family (which may "force" the family to kill the woman to "restore their honor"). It can even be used to gain business advantage.
Ho usato i Copic per colorare l'immagine e sul fiocco ho aggiunto dei piccoli tocchi di Stickles Star Dust.
My only issues, now are…
The tumble of children went off to the verandah , the older ones supervising the proper progression from cold meats to chocolate spread on an unending supply of crusty rolls . A huge table was filled with food and plates were passed round . The merits of different local hams were debated and one cheese was eaten to the last crumb as everyone enthused . The splendidness of the local baker was universally acknowledged . The plates of macaroons , florentines and chocolates were all enjoyed . It was , after all , a very Belgian occasion .
Interestingly enough, though, he discovered possible connections between phenomena that he had previously thought unrelated. His conclusions required nothing less than that he suspend conventional Western notions of reality, perception, and consciousness, and that he become more open to a different, less linear, less materialistic, and more ancient way of seeing.
That I wasn't a good enough lover
My new stamp this month is the Diamond Backgrounder - I stamped it to be my skyline backdrop again the Echo Park Yours Truly 12 x 12 stickers. Then I embossed the base of the circle with the Swiss Dots Cuttlebug folder - one of my all-time greats!
You will have until April 25th to complete and get your shoes mailed to me:Please try your very best to stick to the date~~ I know I look really forward to getting my swaps on time and it just stresses us all if we are late! I know situations arise.. but pretty please try!
‘It takes less time to learn how to write nobly than how to write lightly and straightforwardly’, by FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.
i began to embrace a different kind of friday night as i pulled into the YMCA.
I commit myself to investigating why I haven’t accepted and allowed myself to make a clear directive decision/choice to correct myself and walk a path of self respect and thus to then do that but that I have accepted and allowed myself fight with myself attempting to hold onto both sides which thus always end up with me falling as I refuse to let go of the past, and thus I commit myself to bringing myself to a point where I am able to let go of the past completely and in this walk a new pattern or patterns of self honesty and in this establish myself as an actual point of self respect.
No one affiliated with those children have sound judgment. Eight premature infants should not be entrusted to their care. No one mentions the six children she selfishly, willingly, willfully and with forethought and malice, did this do. She sentenced to a life without a childhood and to a life of neglect. Dr Oz goes one further and calls it “child cruelty”.
UB40 have given the Nelson classic a nice spin through their well oiled reggae riddim machine and the Campbell brothers (Robin and Duncan) harmonize quite nicely a la a blue-eyed reggae version of the Everly Brothers. Its all topped off with a nice bit of slide guitar over the band's patented loping bass and drums, making it a serious contender for a new fan favorite among the band's many popular cover songs. Its got crossover radio radio hit written all over it, but alas, who still listens to the radio these day?
(Its 5 foot and weighs 25 kilos, and we lugged it across five countires, getting it home)
“Mr. Beal, what is the problem?”
"Oh! Here's a picture of a cute dress for a little girl!"
I’ve found that when you use the browser to scale type the get aspect ratio function ceases to provide meaningful numbers for screen.width and screen.height, but if you access those values directly through the console they also seem to be screwed up. I’m not sure if there’s anything that can be done about it.
Through and through....my mother & grandmother are with me, helping me grow.
Set the oven to 400˚ F
a. First they would have to be paid using a lawful currency, backed by gold and silver as the constitution dictates. This would eliminate inflation and gyrating economic cycles created by the Federal Reserve System.
This week I am the hostess. The verse I have selected is from Philippians 2:3-4 "Do nothing out of selfish ambition or vain conceit. Rather, in humility value others above yourselves, 4 not looking to your own interests but each of you to the interests of the others." My challenge is for you to create a card to let someone else know you are thinking about them. It can be a bible verse, a real thinking of you sentiment, sympathy, or hello.
This market is tired and has beat the living daylights out of traders. Good luck!
With regards to the the current issue, the obvious problem for me was that Mr CJ has never had an account with Optus, other than a pre-paid phone service. I arranged it like that specifically so that he wouldn't receive any bills. So I was very curious as to where this debt they were alleging actually came from. I rang the debt collector, and asked them. They said they didn't know, all they had was the balance from Optus, which apparently had been 'verified.' So I rang Optus to ask them. They asked for a reference number, and I gave them the number printed on the letter from the debt collector. They said that it wasn't an Optus account number, and they needed an Optus account number to look into it. Another call to the debt collector. No, they definitely don't have an account number, just a balance, and a phone number for the account Mr CJ was being charged for. Now here's where it gets really weird. I recognised the number they gave me as being my friend Dr MJ's home phone number. This is a private number, it is not an Optus number, and it has been in use for over 20 years, with absolutely nothing to do with Mr CJ, who hadn't even met Dr MJ until a few years ago. Cue the music from The Twilight Zone.
Thats what comes from trying to please too many people. That’s what comes from doing something that my heart wasn’t in to… for 10 hours a day… 50 hours a week. That’s what comes for ignoring my ideas and aspirations because “they wont make me any money”, because they’re “unsustainable”, “unachievable”, “out of my reach” because “Ive already built a life, and its a perfectly fine one and that’s more important”.
I figured I should inaugragate this blog with a mission statement of sorts so press the read more link if you'd like to read it.
I had a conversation some time ago with a polyglot who was adamant that the study of language and the study of literature should not be fused. His view was that schoolchildren would be better served concentrating on learning to understand and speak the target language than splitting their attention between language acquisition and studying (basic) literature in that language. I notice the same kind of thinking on a lot of language learning blogs. The prevailing sentiment is that you learn a language to speak it and to communicate. The literature associated with the language is an optional extra and something that you might dip into if you are at an advanced stage.
No matter what is happening
“Fish swim in that water,” the princess replied, her nose wrinkling in disgust, “it is too dirty for me.”
Different places drift us apart,
What the typical woman does desire is a natural diamond ring. Perhaps it’s because “diamonds are forever?” Diamonds may well be forever, but De Beers only introduced that very successful marketing slogan in 1947. Before then, the gems of choice for an engagement ring were opals, rubies and sapphires.
- Remember to snap a picture of the goodies you're shipping out and email it to us before you stick it in the mail. We want to showcase all of the holiday cheer! In your email with the picture, please include your blog address if it applies. We will do a post on Christmas with all of the pictures and we want to link to your blog, but whew! I can't keep real names and blog names straight!
RELIGION AND FASCISM
PS: We've got a great Deal of the Week right now! This week you can save 20% on all in stock Ranger Products!
approaching out of the corner
7. I can butcher. Not in the serial killer sense. Husband and I have owned our own business for almost 30 years. The Press had a great time taking the Mick here.
Today, Rep. Jeff Wood began serving a sentence of 45 days in one of his cases of OWI or driving under the influence (there are actually five I believe, past and present). Instead of stepping down and recognizing he has a disease which needs to be treated, Wood has consistently defended his position to remain in the Legislature (and the paycheck that goes with it) and refused to gracefully exit stage right. His fellow legislators made a lot of noise about expelling him.
Georgia, which finished 13-1 in 2002, wouldn’t have won the SEC championship that year because it wouldn’t have reached Atlanta despite finishing a game ahead of the Gators in overall SEC record. Ron Zook’s first team, which finished 8-5, would have gone to Atlanta by virtue of going 5-0 against the East.
Consider: is the child accustomed to being away from a parent or caregiver for a large part of each day? They should be in an all-day school program. In most areas, this will be at least Grade One. Many camps won't accept children younger than seven.
Joey: I don't know, maybe we weren't ready to have a chick.
I've not used it yet but definitely plan to!
81. The Piano Has Been Drinking -- Tom Waits
came to England when I was 2 years old. I now live in a small village in East Sussex with my husband Steve who I have been with for over 14 years and have two Yellow Labradors called Poppy and Lulu. Most of all we love going for long walks along the coast and spending time with family. Work-wise, I am a senior project manager based in Central London - which means
Fat:10g (sat 1.8g,mono 4g,poly 3g)
Dodd-Frank was sold to the House and Senate, as in the best interest of the public, just so they could be charged more money for services.
While analysts still expect the economy to recover in the second half of 2012, future evidence of weak activity could lead the central bank to follow an expected interest rate cut of 75 basis points this week with another cut later this year.
They tasted like a mess, too. I think baking powder is one of those chemical-y ingredients that lingers on your palate for many, many minutes after you have eaten it, especially when you eat it in quantity. Yuck.
MESSAGE FROM the I AM Universal Consciousness
I say to the candidates. Don’t kid yourself. You will be attacked. You will be smeared. You will be lied about. You will be threatened,” Gray said. The cybernats and the bedsit bloggers will call you traitor, quisling, lapdog and worse. They will question your appearance, your integrity and your sexuality. They will drag your family and your faith into the lies and the vitriol. It will be worse if you are a woman.
A single guy coping with a baby – and the picture you get of Drew at the starts bodes no good. As you get to know him, his mother dying so young, being in foster homes, makes you expect him to be a waster – he is of sorts but is also a painter. His coping with his son Nick, is so well depicted, I was there as he tries to even feed the baby, and cope with the sleepless nights. I did half expect Nick’s mother to try to reclaim him but she didn’t and such an obvious device would have spoilt the book.
They warn that the government plans to force internet service providers to keep records of all browsing, email, gaming and chat use, and to make those records available to the authorities. It is now revealed the plan is to go further and allow real time snooping by the intelligence services. It will take place without a warrant, as most official surveillance already does.
Even as I write this, I’m sweating and starting to whimper, “Nooo, God, noooo, nooooo!” But that’s because of my own connotations with the word work. In my life, work is something I have to do. I drag my ass out of bed every morning and dutifully punch my timecard. I’m lucky in that some components of my work—graphic design—are things I’m passionate about, but let’s be honest. Some days work eats my soul.
So, a few awesome people already know this (probably the same few who read this blog), but last semester I did a graduate research project on Outfit of the Day bloggers. Now it looks like I may write my thesis for my Sociology M.A. on OOTD blogs. In the interest of full disclosure, I comment and subscribe to blog feeds both because I find them interesting and because I'm researching. In ethnographic terms I am doing participant observation. I just want you to know that, because I'm not trying to be some kind of sneakypants.
My carbs come from things like vegetables and fruits. I eat white rice about once or twice a month. I eat sweet potatoes, white potatoes, and squash when I crave them. I cannot WAIT for cherry season, but right now I eat a lot of blackberries, plums, nectarines, and apples. We have fish around twice a week. We eat a lot of buffalo and grass fed steak we order online. We eat lamb about once a week. Standard side dishes for us are green beans, broccolini with parmesan, brussels sprouts, artichokes, and mashed pumpkin squash. We eat quite a variety of food, basically.
I was reminded at a meeting recently how fortunate my life has been. Despite my years of drinking I remained what many call "a functioning drunk", i.e. I got up every morning, got dressed and got to work. I did enough at work not to get sacked and therefore the money continued to come in. In fact I was very fortunate that I was in an industry and a job that paid very well indeed and therefore the money I needed to feed my habit wasn't difficult to find, I could drink enough and not have to squirrel money away for that from the bills, the shopping etc. I was lucky too that I found recovery before I started to lose the things that really matter - family in particular.
Alarming measurements a ‘parallax error’
Honestly, I made (and spilled) these things a week or two ago, but I saved these pictures for a time like this...when I'm ultra exciting and and not use my brain.
In my weakness, when I rise, My God is shown to be strong. Because I know that in me alone there is nothing strong. It is Him in me that is strong. I will always tell of how his strength took away my anxious, empty, exhausted, afraid, perfectionist heart, and made it joy filled again.
Bushes reach for my clothes, I do not heed
Kelly: Well, I pretty much clearly lied when I told you that you weren’t completely apeshit nuts.
J.C.'s beautiful poem, "Blighted," and his beautiful Patch of Ground and his beautiful symbolic drawing he brought to class just to show me.
In other news, we should have a new challenge coming pretty soon. Stick around, it’ll be a dooooooozy.
Minerd accurately describes how we saved our brave little pennies, all year long: In the early 1960s it was customary for kids like me to save money year-round for the opportunity to purchase a season membership to the Crystal, a pool in South Columbus located on the corner of Champion Avenue and Markison Avenue. I remember saving change in a jar and occasionally dumping it across my bed and counting it and the euphoria I felt knowing that when the tickets went on sale I would have enough to buy one. That was probably the first lesson my parents taught me in working and saving for what was important.
And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined round about him a light from heaven:
Super simple and easy to make and practically zero costs.
Or hath he spoken and shall he not make it good”.
Finding one of these iPad 2,4 variants is not easy, however. “If you’re in the market for an iPad 2, the 2,4 is clearly the one to get – if you can find one that is,” wrote Anand Shimpi.
Caroline then sees Dr. David, the ex, who still vividly remembers being dumped by Caroline years ago. She asks him about Earl and he says he’ll see what he can do. Max and Caroline then take Earl to his private bedroom they call “Cribs: ICU Edition”. Back at the diner, Han’s hoping for a late Valentine’s Day crowd, but soon admits that it’s a bust and closes early to see Earl. At the hospital, Han is the first of the diner group to see Earl and Earl mistakes him for an angel (since he had wings on). Outside the room, Oleg gives Sophie some Valentine’s chocolates. Caroline goes to see David and they find out they both live in Williamsburg. Caroline asks him out, but David turns her down. David tells her he doesn’t see them happening again because of her father’s scandal and what people will think of them dating. When Caroline comes back and tells that to Max, Max goes down to talk to David before he leaves. Max asks David why he can’t be decent and tells him he made the biggest mistake of his life. Max then thanks him for taking care of Earl. Max also goes to the nurse and apologizes by giving him a heart shape candy. He asks her out and she says sure. Back at the apartment, Caroline tells Max that she used to feel bad for her since she didn’t know her dad, but now she feels bad for Max’s dad and says Max would have been a wonderful daughter. Sophie comes by and gives the girls flowers, one for Caroline from her dad and one for Max from Caroline’s dad. Max’s flowers come with a card thanking her for taking care of Caroline. The total for their cupcake shop is $865.
You were my fire – So I burned - Til there was nothing left of me – I touched your face - I held you close – Til I could barely breathe
So let’s go back to the last day of 2011 for just a second. Back in June, I’d been excited over those 1500 total hits to this blog. On the last day of the year, watching with morbid fascination, I was terribly excited to watch that count tick over from 9999 to 10000 hits.
That you can say to me,
At the request of the Kuumba Collective, a phenomenal group of African American artists, my "Two Faces of Eve" sculpture will be shown in a special breast cancer awareness section of their brand new gallery. "Two Faces of Eve" makes us question whether it is ugly, confusing, erotic, calm, elegance, merely a representation of disease in the body, or a pictorial of how cancer makes women feel going through chemotherapy, or . . . . ? You tell me what you think the sculpture represents.
Throw in a layer of Lynnderella One Nutty Fruitcake, and you have a gorgeous jelly sandwich:
Oddly, I have found that most people do not do this universally; that is to say, they do not treat everyone this way, just certain people. The most common delineation? Age.
I'm the type of reader who delights in the comfort of repetition (just look at my fairy tale obsession for proof of that--how many times can I possibly read a 12 Dancing Princesses retelling? Endlessly), so I don't mind this checklist of the familiar approach. I even think it's fun spotting all of the requisite features.
Bring Granulated Sugar and Water to boil in a large heavy skillet, stirring until sugar is dissolved. Add peel and boil, stirring, until most syrup is absorbed, about 10 – 12 minutes.
But we never got to see those thanks to Augusta National and its influence with the FAA.
on earth as in heaven.
They were really good! They were surprisingly dense. The closest thing I can think of to describe them was a lighter version of a bagel from a chain store like Bruegers, Panera or Einsteins. Were they supposed to be like that? I don't know. Maybe I added too much flour, or kneaded it too much or not enough. I'm still trying to figure out this whole bread thing. Even if I screwed them up they were a tasty tasty side to spaghetti.Blockette did not see me making these rolls. I was a horrible parent and plonked her in front of the TV. I knew if she saw the olives she would make up her mind to hate them before the first crumb hit her tongue. She could smell that I was caramelizing onions so she just assumed the dark spots were "brown onions."
Being a Pearl Girl isn’t easy (reread Margaret’s description of the oyster, the pearl, and the sand!), but there is no more beautiful way to exemplify the woman of God, made perfect by His polishing and useful for His glory…and able to live and move “beyond me.”
Dictator: Can I see a big black dog?
Becoming minimalist
The other day I had a handyman come over and replace the ceiling fan in my daughter’s room. The fan was in good working order, so he was careful with it. He placed it gently in some Styrofoam packing material and it sat in my living room for a day before finding a new home.
But because I speak the truth, you do not believe me.
40. Trick Or Treat - Karen & Cubby
Even in practice, the focus and intensity of the team is felt throughout the gym. They practice as though they are playing for the championship every day. I think they may be picturing the Concordia University, St Paul team – the team that has knocked them out of the National Championship race three years in a row, while they are practicing.
I am green slime oozing up from fissures of distrust
Things that are going through my mind atm….
Phew.
1. The photos are in fact real. No photo shopping or alteration have been done, the prints were made by putting our faces in fresh powder and then I took pictures with a point and shoot camera.
So we’re still about 4 months out from General Assembly and it feels like I’m banging my head into a wall. Not just for me but for a lot of the young adults I’ve talked to about this.
I whipped out the tape and stuck it in the VCR. of course I had to rewind it because we hadn't even done that much after filming.
On Wednesday night, as I wrote in my last post, I was visiting friends in Tzur Hadassah and spent the end of Yom ha-Zikaron with them.
2. A company is a community, not a machine.
Just stunning isn't it? Thanks again everyone and we hope to see you join the fun on this month's challenge.
Airlines will not let you one their airplane without a visa. They're liable for HUGE fines and sundry if they do, not to mention the sundries that the foreign country has waiting for you.
As Jamie’s relationship with God grew, she discovered her heart was filled with songs and poetry. During high school she wrote lyrics for her brother’s band. (And she sang them too!) After college, Jamie married, had two sons and decided to stay home with them. While she homeschooled she wrote skits, poems, plays and short stories for school and church.
Each of us who are building a ministry need some wiggle room. Recently, at Special Gathering, we’ve been working with a new staff person. She is wonderful and one of the most teachable people I’ve ever met. There are so many things that a person who desires to excel in ministry must learn.
The second dream came the night after. Maybe it was just a fragment from the past.
When I went on for my follow-up and next OB appointment I asked what my cervix length was on the day the cerclage was placed and it was 3.6 cm which while shorter than average is still good, so we weren't quite so worried anymore.
Surkin – White Knight (Jackson & His Computer Band Remix)
So she hissed at me again and disappeared until her daddy came home..
This Love Dare can be a last resort, but it doesn’t have to be that way.. guy or girl, husband or wife, this can be an exciting adventure in discovering new ways of loving your spouse!
Don't forget that you still have time to play along with our current challenge!! This challenge ends on May 2nd. Click HERE for more details!
Are like Atlanta's ball cast in men's views ;
Happy Saturday, welcome to a new challenge with Speedy Fox and Friends. This week we are challenging you to make a card using shades of blue. With so many different shades of blue out there your possibilities are endless.
Pacing is frequently a challenge, particularly for a long manga, but I think this one works despite its length largely because the cast is so diverse and complex (rather than pat standard side characters). Although there is a potential for the shojo standard reverse harem (one girl with many male potential admirers), it's generally more family-like with really only Yuki and Kyo as serious potential love interests. The side stories and complicated emotional histories of the various characters have considerable depth and, frequently, charm. Sometimes, they are downright heart-wrenching and it's somewhat intriguing to me how the author used the silly premise to highlight some key family interactions. Momiji's past (and his Tohru-like acceptance) of a horrific situation was particularly touching for me.
10:30am – 11:30am
All the photos are 11″ x 14″ framed with white mats and black 16″ x 20″ frames and the consistency of the exhibits in the big room, all photos, same mats and frames, is very appealing.
Joe & Sharon
Ryoma’s solo work is erratic and intense. It’s got a mischievous playfulness to it that you don’t hear in WEG’s mature, long-winded compositions.
Would I be eaten by wolves?
This I think is beginning to approach the crux of the problem. Ultimately, “autism” is a label for a set of behaviours. By always beginning with autism and working backwards, we have invested too much significance in the label itself.
This made it the perfect choice to use on this project where adhesive had to be used in the folded areas of this invitation. There is no puckering, no waves in the paper... yet all of this was adhered with a liquid adhesive! Impressive... I sure think so.
Howd-ya do, howd-ya do, howd-ya do
Without an editor, a writer is allowed to be verbose and tangential, to forget the argument entirely or to create an argument that makes sense only to him (or her). You may be in love with what you wrote, but that doesn’t make it good and it certainly won’t make others want to read it. As my mentor, Karen Hodges Miller, likes to say, “The greatest writing in the world is useless if no one reads it.” And to get it to the point of readability, someone other than you should read it.
There was early recognition that all teaching teams would need support.
Produced by Milton Miranda
To let you know that I'm going to do a separate page for the photo food diary - I think it takes up too much room on the main blog page. So if you want to see what I've been eating check under 'Photo Food Diary' on the right hand side of the blog!
My little disclaimer here - I'm committing a big movie review faux pax here and letting my fond memories of one movie taint my opinions of the newer one. It's never fair, but with a remake I feel like at least some comparison is in order.
Level 11: MP Cost: 40, Duration: 110 seconds, 57% chance to not get knocked back.
Wipeout 2048′s futuristic racing looks absolutely beautiful, with sharp, detailed environments blasting past as you race. It’s also one of the games to utilise cross play, letting you race against PS3 opponents on certain Wipeout HD tracks.
Horizontal Calf Raise: 20 @ 30 lbs
Kids have this ability to be so resilient when as adults we worry ourselves into the ground. I happened upon the following entry that my daughter wrote in her blog. I have to share it with you because it brought a huge smile to my face during an extremely stressful time and put what is really important into perspective. My family.
The roomette we shared was tight, but our facing seats reclined and converted into bunk beds, helpful since the trip lasted about 20 hours. Mifi reception was great, so I didn’t have to go through total withdrawal from stat-checking.
(Same as Chorus Chords)
Instead of:
But I hate feeling like a fraud or hypocrite.
+Yes My Brother (You've Gotta Turn Yourself Around)
Feb 22
Glad to be hearing those words, mostly because I’ve been wanting Insanity for months. But I’m so glad I finally got it. Anyways, I started Insanity yesterday with the fit test. And this is what I got for numbers:
I see and understand
Jesus suffered verbal insults and physical abuse.
When we say that by the year 2012 AD, those humans, both individually and collectively, will have reached a point of transformation, we speak about a point that we do not want you to forget. It will be a time of choices that each person, each nation, each race, and all sorts of groups and organizations of people, must make. Many will stand at the door of Initiation. Each will have to decide whether to hesitate, to walk through the door, or not to walk through the door that leads one into a higher, more refined level of consciousness. This will be one of the most important decisions concerning the use of one’s free will that one will encounter in their life. This is true because the decision each one will make can and will greatly influence the future, indeed the very “destiny” of the planet. It, in fact, will influence the destiny of humanity and all forms of life that dwell on Earth. And so to understand as thoroughly as possible by the human intellect about initiation is so very significant now.
“Dear Dad,” she said. “I found you, but I don’t think this is where my life is.” Although she didn’t want to stay with him, a stranger, she couldn’t wait to give him the letters that remained in her notebook.
Something seemed just a little...I don't know..."off", I guess. Maybe it was something in her voice, or in her face. Or maybe it was just the way she carried herself - I don't really know, but looking back on it now I can distinctly remember thinking something just wasn't quite right about her that day.
So, I decided to make some pita chips and serve as a Tapas platter.
Jason would like for the grooming, groping, manipulation and lies of his daughter, and the stress that his wife has been endured to receive restitution by way of a criminal conviction for grooming (which is in alignment with my petition and bill), and for him to spend time behind bars.
Perhaps not the best quality record 'vinyl-wise', but good enough to help me through these rough winter times and to get me in the right mental mood for spring...
Europe, the majority of whose nation-states are nominal democracies, has proved utterly unable to shake off its masters, despite the well-established opposition of the majority of ordinary Europeans to them and their socialist-superstate scheme. The Old World has had longer to marinate in socialist and superstate ideas, though one might well wonder why the proximity of the largest failed socialist superstate in history hasn't dampened their affection for them. What those ordinary Europeans fail to grasp is that their demands on their governments, jointly and severally, constitute a demand for exactly what's being done to them. The ideological habitat of contemporary Europe is immensely favorable to authoritarianism, socialism, and the Omnipotent State, and ferociously hostile to freedom, capitalism, and national sovereignty.
UPDATE: 15th March, 2011. The CBI has responded to a request for further information on the baseline scenario and whether or not it is a forecast and has provided a 2-page briefing which includes “the Central Bank is applying a scenario that both commercial and residential property prices continue to decline in the base and the stress case. It is important to note, that these are not forecasts of outcomes but represent two possible paths from a large range of future outcomes regarding property prices. In this regard, there is a significant degree of uncertainty surrounding the range of possible future outcomes for the domestic property market. These are related to borrower and bank behaviour, measurement problems determining the of extent of property price declines due to the lack of a significant amount of transactions, and the continued unavailability of national residential and commercial property price indices, and future demand for residential and commercial property.” I must say that I find this unconvincing because of my understanding that the adverse scenario is supposed to be the worst realistic outcome and the baseline the most likely outcome. The baseline and adverse scenarios are not some random scenarios chosen by rolling a dice, they are deliberately selected (and other scenarios are deliberately excluded) because of what they represent and if the baseline does not represent the CBI’s forecast of the most realistic outcome for the future, what does it represent and why is included in the stress tests. In an entry later today, the CBI’s approach will be contrasted with the UK Financial Services Authority approach to the stress testing of UK banks which was published yesterday.
3. Onion, medium size, 1.
Preheat oven to 450 degrees. While the oven is preheating spread ranch on the pizza shell, add pork and top with crushed pineapple, red pepper, and cheese. Bake for 8-10 minutes or until crust is golden brown and cheese is bubbly.
Be a Follower of Crowley Party
14. The Horrors “Still Life”
__Among the various in form, setting and technique of jewellery production of one of the mightiest states of the medieval Europe – the Kyiv Rus (9th-13th cent.) a special place is occupied by the decorations executed in the technique of cloisonn? enamel. These are such details of princely dressing, as pendants for the womanish head-dress – colts, diadems, barmy adornment, executed to the individual order without any copy. Multicoloured enamels combined with images full of sacred sense draw the attention of visitors.
I was a fan of Fleetwood Mac’s and the song Rhiannon released on their 1975 self-titled album. When I said Rhianna instead of Rhiannon, MJ corrected me about the song title.
like the strange bay of an island
Rational Dialogue: First, you aren’t fat. You are a normal size. That person is a normal size for their body (and if they aren’t then they need help). Second, you have been the smallest one in the room and that only lead to Laureate, a tube up your nose and stuck in a wheelchair for two months. Third, eat your damn food.
New York DA Cyrus T. Vance did, it’s true, delay DSK’s return to France for no reason as yet apparent. But another NYC source in turn sticks to his belief that the NYPD ,Vance and the FBI were looking for some kind of sting against DSK throughout that period:
Now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot,
Click Here for our second episode or check out the handy dandy player below. We apologize about the length, we just couldn't help being so excited to see Jane and Maura again!
Randed shoes are losing popularity by this time period. That's not to say they don't exist, but the English seem to use them much less commonly after 1760 (this is the only post-1750 example on the Shoe Icons site). It makes for a much sturdier shoe, and the sole can be replaced. The rand is stitched to the upper, then the rand is stitched to the outsole, all right side out.
I liked this exercise. Klein seemed to like it too. She likes to be a little lazy either when jumps are 2'6" and below OR if the first jump in the line is lower than the last. In that case if the first jump is lower she just assumes that the second jump is the same height and she'll take the last one out. Jeffray told me if we're doing something where I think that will happen, don't put her boots on her. Let her learn and start to care about paying attention. Well, today...she did just that, ONCE and learned her lesson. I made sure I had the wooden rails (we have PVC too) up and she came through the first lower jump and the second one was at 3'3" and she took the rail. All it took was once, she didn't touch it again. I eventually raised both jumps to 3'3" but after she proved to me she could pay attention by going through a couple times with the first jump lower.
If it was feasible, possible, or in all reality if I were able, I’d drive there tonight and sit on the beach. I’d take off my shoes and soak my feet in the cool water. I’d lean back and gaze out at the expanse of the river, allowing the gentle lapping of that shimmering water against sand to ebb and wash away the dust and worries of everyday life.
Yesterday, my whole office celebrating their happiness of getting their annual bonus.. but not ME! I joined them not long ago, therefore it's 'usual' for me not getting any.. but I am hoping the best come next year. While everyone was out having lunch, I had my own lunch box packed consist of:-
It may even be glazed over with something sugary making it appear sweet.
On Friday, the phone rang with good news instead: His sister had reached Dubai on a temporary visa, joining the growing flight of Christians from the relentless violence in Iraq.
As expected, at midnight, I was awakened by the explosions of fireworks from the football field. But I managed to fall asleep again soon after (surprisingly) and woke up at 3:00 am, all geared up for my first ever new year’s day run. Years ago, this was the time I’d returned home from the clubs.
All the big Western brands — like bullshit artist Dove — market these. Advertise them constantly, and skin lighteners generally, including some banned in the West (or, about which warnings have been issued regarding known dangers). Disgusting. But just for the underarms. Really?
The investigators said that they would not pursue anything because it was not skin-to-contact. They said that based on the communication between them, no one would believe that she was groped rather that it was consensual behavior.
Next was the ethereal Arielle Dombasle, a frequent talk-show guest and wife of Bernard-Henri Levy. She looked impossibly thin and iridescent. In person, she seemed almost non-existent physically -- ghostlike, a vanishing Cheshire Cat with plumped lips. Her co-guests were Edouard Baer and the cast of Looking for Mr. Castang, who were boisterous and funny, funny, funny! Theirs is a show I'll definitely want to see.
I said "Okey dokey. I was going to do that anyway. When he gets done eating I'll cuff him up."
I first met Susan around 9 years ago , she was a black woman who viewed the world so different, she was ridiculed locally and deemed mad.I hung around with her for around 2 years meeting up about 2-3 times a week,we became good friends and dated briefly. After knowing her for about 4 hours I was drawn into her mystical world and although experience had taught me to be cautious, I freely entered into her strange world. her ground floor flat was grubby and crammed with junk and other stuff.
In fact, Pirate Boy did not speak until he was two and a half. Not one word. Not mama, nothing. And then suddenly, he spoke in fully articulate sentences. And I'm not sure, but his first words may have been "Mommy has a deadline."
their specific identity.
So yes, before i get on to my candy! woohoo!! here's my final card!
If Mulcahy had any doubts about his new job, he suppressed them by believing – or wanting to believe – that Ed Wilson was still linked to the C.I.A. ”Ed would parade his contacts in the C.I.A. with the people he was doing business with to impress them that he was still C.I.A.,” Mulcahy says. ”He would suggest he was still under deep cover.” Often on Friday nights, Wilson made it a point to go drinking at bars in suburban Virginia known to be after-hours hangouts for C.I.A. officials on duty at the agency’s headquarters in McLean. Mulcahy, the new partner, began going along. ”I thought he was agency,” Mulcahy says of Wilson. ”I had no question in my mind.”
I found some new plates at Home Goods and the plaid napkins are also from Home Goods and the gold acorn ones are from Williams Sonoma outlet. I need to go get more. Still deciding what to do for a centerpiece in here.
For years our "schooling" is a bit of a blur, I'm afraid. I was pretty young! I know that we had various school books and programs and stuff, but the only thing I can ever remember my mom actually trying to force was math. We did lots of fun science experiments, as well as watching Nova and Nature and similar shows avidly (I say we, because my sister reached school age with no one ever suggesting she go to school, so we just continued to learn together!). My mom always read aloud to us, poetry, stories, the newspaper, and I started actually reading at age 8 or 9 when she was reading Harry Potter too slowly for my taste! We never did book reports, though I'd enthusiastically tell my mom about whatever book I was reading. None of us considered that "schooling". We considered it life! I memorized poetry, and wrote both poetry and stories before I could even read (I'd narrate them to mom ;-)). My sister ad I would play spelling games for fun, and we relished our regular trips to the library, where we'd get whatever books we wanted (Emi would always max out her card, ending up with huge piles of books that my mom and I would then end up carrying, since she was too little!). Throughout this time period, my mom would tell everyone that we were doing "child-led" homeschooling.
To be precise, my first experience of Wherry was at the ludicrously lovely Hunny Bell pub in the small North Norfolk village of Hunworth. I'd been on a different beer for a couple of previous nights (I was in the area on an extended stay) until a knowledgable local discretely ushered me in the direction of a neighbouring hand-pump, and a love affair began a few sips hence.
Accessories- 1/8" circle punch, crop o dile, Scallop corner punch, dimensionals, button, Scallop border punch, Diamond glaze
Please, if you want to comment, comment, if you want to email me or call me, I'd love to speak with you. If you still think, after all this, that I am crazy and wasting my life and my life... so be it. I will be praying for you because, dear friend, I would hate for you to die and spend eternity in Hell. And you know what, if I'm wrong and this whole Jesus thing isn't true... at least I lived my life having hope and faith in something that caused me to think beyond myself and positively impact people around me.
So, by monistic idealism, I made it clear that, no, I don’t mean that dualistic kind of Western idealism, but really a monistic idealism, which has existed in the West, but only in the esoteric spiritual traditions. Whereas in the East this is the mainstream philosophy. In Buddhism, or in Hinduism where it is called Vedanta, or in Taoism, this is the philosophy of everyone. But in the West this is a very esoteric tradition, only known and adhered to by very astute philosophers, the people who have really delved deeply into the nature of reality.
Harvey Houdini was about to make Prestidigitation History!
image: Jamie
Contribute Money: The most simple and straight forward of all charitable giving…money. If your cash flow is alright at the moment and you can spare a bit of the green stuff, consider picking out a local worthy charity that fits the values of your company and donate. If you have employees, you might consider offering a matching funds program where they donate to a charity that you both agree upon and your company matches their donation. It’s a great way to show your employees that you care about organizations that are important to them. In turn, it builds loyalty with those employees and awareness of your company by folks in the community who care about the charitable organizations that you are supporting.
In these efforts she was catholic in her taste, photographing both hovels and plantation houses. Her garden photography, though heavily weighted toward the rich and famous, shows this same expansiveness, an appreciation of the beauty to be found on the stairs to a basement apartment, as in my favorite photograph of the collection, the Janitor's Garden.
Would you think that the branch purposely wanted to fall on you?
11. Here We Go - Big In Japan
In part one, I sketched a basic pro-SENS argument. I also sketched Agar’s three main lines of attack on that argument. In this post, I will go through all three in more detail. One general note at the outset: most of Agar’s comments depend on speculative predictions about the likely outcomes of negligible sensescent. As a fan of science fiction, I enjoy this, but it might prove to be frustratingly suppositional for some.
DAY 2 -Effects
The compass is ready for reinstallation on the boat. That only takes a few minutes and four little screws to mount, but a little longer to solder the wires of the new lights.
I am moving over to my other blog Jane Monk Studio so I have everything I do in one place. My main occupation/job is Longarm Machine Quilting for other people. You finish your quilt top and bring it to me for quilting. I can provide batting and backing as well as a fantastic range of thread colours and quilting patterns.
Sasquatch was moved from its outdoor location at Kesey Square to the Eugene Hilton last year amid space concerns. The decision allowed the organizers to move the festival up a month to May since weather was not a concern (fortunately). This date is better suited to commemorate the passing of Glen Hay Falconer. At the brewer's dinner this year, Hopunion made a huge announcement as they presented a check for $50,000 to the Glen Hay Falconer Foundation. Many of the beers at this year's festival featured the proprietary Falconer's Flight blend including Maritime Pacific's Decompression Ale, Seattle Beer Week's 2011 Commemorative Beer. This beer was created by Corey Blodgett, a past winner of the Glen Hay Falconer Foundation Brewing Scholarship Program.
Dr Feelgoods 7th Album: As It Happens is released in June 1979, and is the bands second live album. As with their first live album (Stupidity), each side is taken from a different gig. Side 1 comes from The Pavilion in Hemel Hempstead, where as Side 2 comes from Crocs, just up the road in Rayleigh. Nowhere on the sleeve (or inner sleeve) does it mention where the live photos used on the sleeve were taken, but I guess there is always a chance that one (or more) of them was taken at Crocs.
Unfortunately I have neither beautifully manicured lawns nor beautiful clothing. When my friends and I get together we are more apt to drink margaritas than eat salads, although the gossip is always there in full force. This weekend it was beautiful out. Sunny and warm, more of a summer day than even spring. We met with friends for lunch on Saturday, but lunching at McDonalds is decidedly un-"ladies who lunch."
so well for them
“Human beings are the only creatures on earth that claim a God and the only living thing that behaves like it hasn’t got one.” – The Rum Diaries
1 contrary
This semester's group did a nice job with Dan Meyer's Toast video. I had them ask questions and record what they noticed. There was a neat dichotomy: the WCYDWT responses were all pretty traditional math textbook questions. The what they noticed branched far afield, wondering what would make a good soundtrack, wondering about darkness of toast and toaster design.
Tanya: You haven’t got any.
To add EQ Three to a track, drag it from the Live Effects Browser to the title bar of the desired track(s).
We have left our bones in the Bagshot stones
For the final test at Barcelona, Ferrari brought the long awaited revisions to the F150 (although the cars name has frequently changed, I’ll continue to use this title). This consisted of a revised wings, new sidepods and new exhausts. It was Ferraris assertion at its launch that the car would have evolved aero and specifically different exhausts before the first race. So despite some people suggesting the changes are copying their rivals, it’s more likely that different teams have converged on the same ideas.
31. “Marathon” by Tennis
There is the planning process where I’ve plotted out my idea on the computer & everything has been pulled together to actually begin. Then there is the what-if process where the unknown element comes into play. This sketch for instance:
How sweet — but for that in that famously touchy age, the fact of Hooke’s modest height gave the conventional phrase a nasty edge both men
Defending the Caveman, Blue Man Group, Cirque du Soliel Beatles Love, The Venetian, Caesars Palace, The Mirage, and Madame Tousseds.
Since this project was just beginning in mid-September in Johnstown, PA, the weather was less than spectacular but for the ad I had in mind, it was perfect. I pulled a group of friends together and headed down to the football field on campus to shoot the next concept. Here’s what it looked like when we got there:
“StudentsFirst has a very pragmatic and research-based approach to trying to reform education systems and trying to make them better,” Dieckhaus said. “There are a lot of organizations out there that represent the interest of teachers, school board members, administrators. We need more folks in the Capitol building that can truly speak on behalf of parents and students as their priority.”
The Day of Mourning is a national annual event, which began in Canada and is now commemorated in more than 70 countries worldwide.
I stopped reading Shadow Kiss when there was only 1/3 of the book left to read. I couldn't get myself to enjoy it. Sorry, I know that there are lots of you who loved this series. Reading should be F-U-N, right? So I grabbed some other book to read which I enjoyed and loved--The Day Before by Lisa Schroeder. It's a beautiful story. Emotional and deep. It was written in verse so I finished it in two hours. Really good book, I loved it! I also finished Tempting the Best Man by J. Lynn (Jennifer Armentrout). It was really fun and sexy and yummy. Very enjoyable read and I loved it too! I guess I really had a couple of good reads last week even though I wasn't able to finish Shadow Kiss. I am also reading City of Lost Souls by Cassandra Clare (yes!!!) and I AM ENJOYING IT. No further comment (yet).
Grapefruit
This is a recurring problem. The owners/managers seem to be in the business to sell alcohol and sleep with strippers, not run a proper club and always get involved around the same time as the police, so drama is entirely out of control relative to any other club in the area. It bothers me my ex works there when they have these sorts of cultural problems, especially considering she was injured by a customer last year who grabbed her in private dance when the bouncer was too busy watching the girl on stage to pay attention. All the more respectable, better managed clubs in the area are nude though and she’ll only do topless.
I have a guilty habit that I’m coming out of so I have the confidence to confess it. In doing research about a personal subject of interest years ago I hooked on to two women’s online stories. The stories progress in time but the women do not seem to improve in character or their goal. Each story spans a period of 4-6 years and each woman is still spinning her wheels. It is like watching a train crash and it is so hard to turn away.
The idea of widening Governor’s Road and a lack of short-term improvements for pedestrians, cyclists and transit in the draft master plan drew fire from Transportation for Livable Communities, which made a submission suggesting the plan did not deliver on its objectives or principles and argued the draft plan does more to accommodate cars than sustainable forms of transportation.
is worth a million statues
After sharing so many started projects, I thought I'd better show a finished one too :)
Lt. Michael Esposito, 41, New York, N.Y.
By IAN JOHNSON
Instead of holding the remote to take the picture each time, I used my camera's 2 second self timer with it.
From Qoud today we have an index.
I had seen you walk by,
Just enter it into the Promotional Code slot before you checkout!
Sigh. Aren't their hatbox arrangements pretty?
In the brilliant video, Björk plays the role of a little girl who lives in a sort of Disney noir forest. As in the best fairy tales, underneath the picaresque surface lurks the sinister and macabre. A cute teddy bear becomes a cruel, marauding beast (Björk ends up in his tummy), while the parallels between human and animal drives are underlined by juxtaposing a moth that flies blindly into a light bulb with Björk as a cosmonaut hurtling to the moon. The video plays on Björk's childlike image and the fact that she comes from Iceland, a country where a large percentage of the population believe that fairies really exist. Appropriately, Debut is an enchanting album.
Sometimes you just gotta step back and have your hair done.
A: Well, that’s the only thing I do. That’s one thing I have to do before every game, or I won’t feel energy, and I’ll just feel slow. When I do I just feel light on my feet and everything, and I feel faster, so that’s what I do.
She combines witchcraft with her extensive knowledge of uranium mining in the book, where she tells the reader about the subjects she has covered for the Independent. She has been a reporter, based in Tuba City and Fort Defiance for longer than a decade and is well-known for her stories on uranium, water, and Navajo issues. These issues have changed over the years and she keeps on top of the change and throws into her book many of her flashes of insight, her dreams and her connection with Keanu Reeves.
To register please contact Alyssa:
I went out for a drink with my dad tonight. Now, dad and I don't always see eye to eye. He lets me run the bar as I see fit, and he's happy with the result. In the kitchen, occasionally he'll over-rule me a suggest I do a special in a different way, or with a different sauce. But on the whole recently we seem to be agreeing a lot more, which is making life a bit easier for both of us and work a bit more fun.
marionettes on severed strings,
Using a standard population forecast model for animals, the results of this week’s work has prevented 5,092,000 dogs and 4,070,000 cats which could have otherwise been born over the next 6-7 years.
Thankfully we packed them off home once George had snored his way through most of the Peter Kay DVD. We ended the evening watching The Inbetweeners movie: I hid behind the cushion for most of it. Rory, completely unfazed by his parents watching him with it, roared with laughter and Dougie, rather taken with a whole new supply of rude teenage slang, tottered behind me as we staggered up the stairway to heaven, wondering hopefully if, perhaps tonight, the pony needs feeding....
To obtain the life and career we as writers have so greatly desired, we must dream, visualize what we want and work hard. At first, we are the aspiring journalist.
Yesterday I was out of sorts all day. It was a feeling of oppression and I prayed against it and it finally lifted. Then I remembered, it’s Beltaine and the light bulb went off! Walpurgis Night or Beltaine is being celebrated by covens all over our country. They know what this day is and those who are immersed in the occult look to it to gain personal power. Human sacrifice can be a part of this day and we should be on our guard and be in prayer to offset what those who embrace The Fallen One are up to!
I'd love them in a little girl's room as well. And they come in every color imaginable so you're sure to find just the right shade to coordinate with your room. Bonus: They're just "up the road" from me in Boone, NC!
Before I go I just wanted to share with you my favorite SSD stamp set. Remember, If you buy this set or any other before midnight on the 23rd of September $2 will go to the Komen Foundation.
Videos is THE place to go for awesome little videos of back to school projects (Did you know you can paint with ice?) Be sure to check out their other videos and great back to school tips, too.
Happy Labor Day
First of all: What is fat burning?
The Google study also shows that 41% of smartphone users researched with their mobile device and went on to actually purchase on the smartphone. That data point is higher than in some other mobile commerce studies. For example, a study released in January 2012 by customer experience management firm ForeSee indicates that during the 2011 holiday season only 15% of online shoppers used their phones to make purchases. The phone was most commonly used as a research and price comparison tool. However, Google/Ipsos OTX studied only smartphone owners while ForeSee looked at online shoppers as a whole, a group that includes many feature phone owners as well.
At the time, September, 1939 the second world war was only in Europe, quite far from the Philippines and had just begun. There was then no likelihood of the Philippines being involved in the war until more than two years later, in December, 1941. The National Assembly was then free to meet either in regular or special session to enact legislation to meet the emergency. In fact, it met in regular session in January, 1941 lasting 100 days and in January, 1941 for another regular session of 100 days, excluding the several special session held during those two years. And yet the Assembly delegated legislative powers to the President under section 26, Article II of the Constitution. This is clear proof that, contrary to the theory of the majority opinion, the Legislature delegated legislative powers to the President even when it could meet and it actually met several times.
I was laughing the whole time – especially when I explained that ‘sin city’ would overtake me if I tried to live in Vegas and Jesus might not approve. The boys agreed God is beyond good and I should stay working for Him.
was amazing. Now it has become my favorite event
This news video also demonstrates different reporting techniques used in a news package. You hear the reporter give the report in a voiceover. Giving context to clips of quotes from persons of interest to the story. In between clips of persons of interest, clips of scenes relevant to the story or b-roll is edited in not only to give the viewer something to look at but also to provide more context to the story.
OH! OH OH!! I have to tell you who wrote this!! You will NOT get over this! You know who wrote Queen Of Outer Space? Do you? You won't believe this. The writers of this macho, men-overpowering-women space soap opera are none other than Charles Beaumont and Ben Hecht.
Her lonely little grave
What do you call the kind of spice that has an oval-shaped body and extremely long legs?
“My looks?”
First one, I love because the title is PERFECT for the filmstrip. And I love my little makeshift sunshine. The circle on the sun is from a MDS download called Sweet Details. AND I love the font I found to use. It is called Smitten Kitten - from a free font site. Want it? Google it!
Maher first clarified his comment that Mormonism is a cult by explaining he meant to say “his ridiculous church.” He admitted that there is no real distinction between a cult and a religion, but he argued that as opposed to Catholics who are very upfront about their beliefs, Mormons tend to be more “secretive” about their faith. And that sounds cultlike to Maher, at least.
Smart companies, however, are aware of this conflict between carrying out procedures and try to remain nimble enough to be competitive. Fads such as the 1980's Japanese Management techniques (e.g., Quality Circles), and this decade's Lean Manufacturing (also out of Japan) sweep the industrial world regularly as managers strive to understand how to walk this balance.
1And there was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein.
To help with the clingyness issue we are sending him to a real preschool. I had wanted to avoid this because I am too cheap. But for him he needs a place to separate from me and places he is comfortable (i.e. church and going to friends houses for preschool) and also get used to larger groups of people and responding to authority from people he doesn't know as well. It will be hard for him at first but I know he will love it after he gets used to it.
1 cup organic quinoa
The Lexus is so classy. I guess I’ve become a bit of a snob. I like driving a nice car, but right now it’s not very practical. Yet, I hold on. So the question for me, is it about self-image or laziness? Do I want to drive 365 days a year, or look good 355? Several people are pushing me to a Subaru, but it just doesn’t feel right… I’m leaning towards an Audi Quattro, an AWD car. No more rear wheel drive for me. I’d get a newer Subaru, but a plusher drive in the Audi. Both used cars, of course. Who wants to be practical? Today, I want to be practical. In March I’ll regret it.
Today have a beautiful blue shimmer released by Milani for their Spring 2012 collection. Milani "Sail Away" is a medium blue creme with blue and silver shimmer. Almost a perfect match for the deep blue shimmer of the ocean.
Alicia Keys
^_^
I think I love this look #1 for the nostalgia factor. It brings up memories of 5 year old birthday parties and rides home looking down at my red tight covered legs bearing traces of a good time had : dried white icing, punch stains and a torn knee ( good for sticking your thumb and fore finger in to make bigger ) Who wouldn't want to bring that back into their grown-woman repertoire of looks?
So of course the Pumpkin says, "Hey Mommy! Remember that time when the police man pulled you over because you were going to fast?"
You always have choices - some are hard, seemingly impossible perhaps - but the choices are there just the same. Need proof? Look at every parent who has left an abusive spouse, or at children who have moved back home to care for ailing parents. Through seemingly impossible odds, people like these have chosen the thing that was right for their hearts, instead of the thing that was easy. For whatever reason, so many other people feel like they have been trapped and cannot escape to pursue their dreams. But for many of them, this "trap" is one of their own making - they bought the cars, they took the jobs, they put their kids in school, and they bought the houses. They created a "reality" for themselves and their families that seems impossible to escape from.
Man can't properly determine
Success rate depends on
02. Bad Luck Charm
It is fair to say that over the last decade I have observed a steady improvement in law firm management and in partner behaviour and discipline. Nevertheless, there is huge room for efficiency gains in just about every law firm in the UK. In addition, the way in which partners manage their people, their time and their priorities is in some cases embarrassingly poor. There are a few Private Equity Houses which are interested in investing in the legal sector and most of them see the imposition of strong management and appropriate accountabilities and discipline to be one of the key areas where they can add value with a view to gaining a return on investment. For the last fifty years or more, lawyers have led a fairly cosy existence with high profits continuing to accrue from traditional working practices and comfortable work ethics. The brutal truth is that these comfort zones are shrinking fast, and the firms who have acted quickly to bring about efficiencies and accountabilities are steadily gaining both in profitability and in the ability to compete.
The media was forgiving when it was disclosed that Obama, as an Illinois state senator in 2001, accepted a $200 contribution from Ayers, a founding member of the group that bombed the U.S. Capitol and the Pentagon during the 1970s.
Four Stars.
Green Flash Brewing Co. Green Flash Grand Cru
Mohamed Jallow is a former Colin Powell fellow. He graduated with a BA in International Studies in 2008, and currently pursuing and MPA at City College. He is a program associate at the Council on Foreign Relations.
I fallowed this ladies tutorial HERE on how to cover the tops of the jars with coffee filters... only I don't drink coffee and the filters are in my craft room for use with glitter. I stained mine with a bit of water, soy sauce and a squirt of an oil based dark walnut scratch repair liquid. (I had it on hand) I love how the oils and water don't mix... when you go to soak anything in there the oils at the top swirl around and take the the paper in different patters.
My son has left for America.
"No, but I was just in the store for like thirty seconds, and now it's going to cost me like three hundred dollars!"
Not sure why I'm just now getting to this beer, but I'm hoping this goes well with my brisket and sausage from Leon's in Galveston.
If you are a Google documents fan, I suggest you download the Google drive application and check it out today.
4) Can you spy…? Like I-spy, but one player describes something they can see and the other has to find it. Eg “I can see a yellow triangle” (hazard light in the car) or “I can see a chicken” (picture on an egg box). This is good for children too young for I-spy. Another variation as is I-spy colours (“I spy something green” etc).
5 help
The layers of denial run so deep that it’s important to try to be clear where we can. First, it is an insult to Hindus, Sikhs and decent, integrated Muslims to classify those brutes under the catch-all title of “Asian males”. All but one are Pakistani Muslims who come from a patriarchal peasant culture that obviously regards young white British girls as easy meat. Those children were considered fair game for degrading sexual acts on an almost industrial scale. The men took a calculated gamble that no one gave a damn about the girls. And you know the worst thing? They were right.
The Lord has sustained me in all sorts of situations where I consciously refrain from turning into the food for my life~all those things food can be that brink on the negativity to destroy me. FOOD MUST stay in it's rightful place in my life...and I don't tolerate it rearing up it's ugly head to try to move into more prominence. NO WAY! I refuse to allow people or events to change what's working...no tossing about like a ship tossed in a storm...I believe with God's help, I must stay firmly affixed to the task of making sure that I am nourished properly each and every time...no changes here, for me.
Every little thing
We visited the Old Town (Stare Miasto) today and did lunch at a restaurant that really represents the best of New Poland. It was a place called Zapiecek that specializes in Pierogi (filled dumplings) with beautiful interior design and with waiting staff in traditional costume. The menus are really well layed out and your mouth is watering while you wait for the food. I had fried Ruskie Pierogi while Aga had placki węgierski (potato pancakes with goulash). We washed it down with beer and raspberrycordial which always hits the mark. At the table next to us there was an American girl with two Polish friends. It was really nice to hear her beautiful Polish, she really was trying hard to say everything correctly. My wife was really impressed.
Re-read: You’ll definitely want to revisit this one every once in a while. It’s one of those books that helps you really believe that love conquers all. And who doesn’t love that?
He is tell us, to be sure to listen thoroughly and weigh the response that we give so that when we speak it is not uniformed, emotional or irrational. Rather, it is deliberate, intentional and proper.
see you all soon
Subsequently, I had green praying mantises.
Ouroussoff suggested that part of that had to do with the expectations of an architect post-Bilbao. Gehry responded, "There's an expectation of what I do: 'This doesn't look like Bilbao; why are you doing this stuff that looks ordinary?' I've gotten some of that already."
How to make the biscuits:
All the government is doing is adding fuel to the fire. Even with above average academic performance, the number of scholarships or financial assistance available is negligible for a white male. I’d love to work more hours and become more independent from my parents, but that’s just not happening anytime soon.
That night, as I lay in bed with Mr7, enjoying the 20 minutes of one-on-one time that we get each day in the guise of Reading, I realised that I would soon be doing this with both boys. Squeezing an entire day's closeness into one tiny window.
Everybody flip-flops, U-turns, ke belekang pusing sometimes. There might be some topics where you’d hold unwavering views. And then there are some things that you could change your mind on. And then there are things you say just because. But politicians, pundits and other public figures, when they speak, especially during election time, that when the fun begins…
What a wonderful and challenging roll that we have been given. There was one completely moving blog post that I read this week that I wanted to be sure to mention just in case your one of the few people that might not read this blog. Check it out. Its a MUST read.
At our last group meeting we learned a little about the transition process we are going to follow in 5 weeks. The first week we are supposed to cut back one product, and add in 4 oz of lean protein plus a half-cup of cooked vegetables. Very specific! So, for example, four ounces of salmon and a half-cup of cooked asparagus, or four ounces of chicken and a half-cup of cooked bell peppers. (Plain and simple – but poor Optifast me, my mouth is watering!)
NBA Finals:
It has been two years that Addisyn has been living with her link. When she is tricked into breaking the rules by Sebastian, a gray winged angel, she witnesses his death at the hands of her Link. Discovering that she can still die, she is furious and demands to know what other secrets they are keeping from her. Who was the strange angel and what did he mean about who she was? Not allowed to tell her what she wants to know, her fellow angels just make her more determined.
Have a Bunnytastic Easter
The late 1990's were a politicised time in general in the UK, we saw the birth of New Labour the first change of government in 18 years, the first time in 23 years a centre left government was elected in the UK, and with a huge majority at that. Further more there was an increased interest in reforming the UK and the Labour government was elected on that platform.
‘Republicans have taken an overwhelming 88 percent of oil and gas contributions this election cycle. While showering politicans with cash, the oil industry also spent over $146,000,000 on lobbying last year’.
My father was happy with his life – he said he had lived his dream. So I asked myself – if I die tomorrow will I be able to say the same about my life? The answer was NO. Why? Because I still wanted to do more, learn more and work with something where I could make use of my talents and education. So a year after my father died, I decided to go back to school and try to make my dream real.
I am warm and dry, inside. Feelings are safe.
Craptastic, BS 12345-67
Hell, the O-man reduced NASA to little more than a Muslim-outreach program – why shouldn’t he straighten out the Secret Service, too? Besides, they’ve been somewhat distracted lately anyway.
Patterned Paper: Wanderer by Basic Grey
I am still working on reorganizing my sewing/crap room, the dresser I picked up at Ikea is a bit larger than I had anticipated. I find this interesting since most of what they carry appears to be suited to munchkins ;) I've been going through the fabric and projects that have been gathering dust for far to long, trying to decide what to keep and what I will realistically use. The project is a cross between Hoarders, Clean House, and Intervention. If I don't get my act together I just might be on the next episode of Disappeared ;)
res-
I've come to realise that I have a fear of fear so If I take that fear away there will be nothing to fear
Next we have Call Me Gwen-Ever. This is a dusty orange polish that required only two coats. I know it doesn't really look dusty but trust me it is! I really liked the application of this polish, it went on smoothly with no balding/ patchy issues.
I chose a traditional palette of gold, ivory and beige for the event. The association provided the food and location so I incorporated a navy blue as the one pop of color to coordinate with the linens that were donated. Here are a few photos of the details I put together for her birthday.
2to proclaim the year of the LORD’s favor
Diabetes is SKYROCKETING around the globe, predominantly in CHILDREN... and I believe that juice boxes, soda, and DIET soda's are the main culprits... couple that with a few fast food meals every week... and it's "goodbye mortality rate" ... hello... funeral director!
Mocknick: We inform people of this upfront, so there are no games or surprises.
He was like an excited little boy.
A fed up and pissed off Girl from Singapore.
I’m still waiting for the sun to shine.
Theme next week: Art on stamps.
“Yeah?” Connor promptly stood, snatched up his binder and progress report, then stomped toward the door. “How this....up yours, you old windbag. What do you think of that?”
Let us leave Arabs to keep living the only way they can, by their 'indigenous values,' and let us keep our 'universal values' where they belong-- in that universe called the West.
~4~
Some upgrades can be so extreme that they no longer look like what they were initially set out to be.
the world stopped spinning around me and i just stared at him in shock. then i ran over to him to hug him and accidentally stepped on his toes (i tend to be rather clumsy). he didn’t even flinch even though he was barefoot and i had my house-shoes on, but just smiled and let me give him a hug.
actually seen, face to face,
She comes by, like clockwork, with a tiny white cup to dispense a tiny white pill.
and pick it back up, upon return.
Bierce hates phonies and is at his best when his naive narrator reveals the hypocrisies he sees around him (and the double-sidedness of his own monkly nature):
The redhead turned and looked at my friend up and down slowly. Then she said, "She can come, too."
Aaah!
“Well, they don’t really look like their pictures. They’re sort of cute though, like bulldog cute.”
There is little doubt about Colton almost dying. Going five days before being diagnosed with a ruptured appendix. By then his body was full of infection. The doctors left tubes in Colton’s abdomen to drain the infection. His ordeal lasted 15 days, Colton was released from the hospital. Burpo gives credit the prayers of God’s people for the miraculous deliverance of Colton death.
Sorry for the delay with the followup post to this one, but I’ve been slacking a bit since popping out those two videos from my trip. Anyway, since I was actually in Louisville visiting Jenny, we decided that it would be fun to have a combined challenge. After having way too hard a time trying to figure out what our challenge would be, we came up with our paper football version of P.I.G.
Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas - Hunter S. Thompson, Vegas, and Johnny Depp... what else could I possibly want?
But get this, when they return, the Parshendi (who have like, marbled skin?) attack them, with fucking arrows. And they have these poor creatures just running, with that huge thing over their shoulders. You get hit, you die.
BRS Labs was recognized for its innovation in the CCTV and Video Surveillance Monitoring category.
You have your list of “requirements”, he either meets them or he doesn’t. He’s either willing to fulfill your wants and needs, or he’s not. The trick is, you have to be secure enough to allow a man you may think is perfect for you walk away if he does not meet or is not willing to fulfill your requirements. In some cases, you may have to adjust your requirements, but not at the expense of settling.
I'm now in the pub garden, listening to the larks in the neighbouring field of wheat. The valley has been at its most astonishing today. We had a barbie in the garden and everything was jaw droppingly beautiful.
Dsp: Brights Stack, Big Top Birthday
Another false dichotomy. Jesus puts evangelism and discipleship together in the Great Commission (Mt. 28:18-20). In fact, you could say that you can’t have one without the other, because a true disciple will evangelize and a true evangelist will want to see, not merely converts, but followers of Jesus. Noble points this out in the paragraph but seems to say many churches are ignoring it. I for one have never heard a church say anything like what Noble says at the beginning of this paragraph. Most churches want to reach out. Many find it difficult. That a church finds it challenging to reach people is not the same as giving “the rest of the world the middle finger.” There may be a variety of reasons why some churches prosper in reaching people and others are less prosperous. But a focus on discipleship is not one of them. In fact, where people are truly being discipled, where true spiritual growth is happening, there will consistently be a greater passion for evangelism.
This will always hurt me, but its over and done now i can’t change times i can only learn from this and try and make things better.
I promise you that you will receive the miracle you need! Yes! It will be the miracle
~Ambrose Bierce (The Devil's Dictionary)
A full Sherlock Holmes novel!
Twist and Shout (Incomplete) 4:16
Eddie suggested a break, and I fed Xander a little more from a bottle, hoping he would fall asleep after such a heroic struggle. He did calm down, but no sleeping yet. Eddie tackled the rest and finally got his head wrapped up like he just had brain surgery.
*flowers in the spring and so much more
Music Habit
One experience that I looked forward to and missed during my visit to England last year were some small details that separate our countries, like the car pictured above. I captured that photograph when I was visiting in 1993. I had never seen anything like it before and loved it. With my recent visit, those differences had all but disappeared. The cars looked very similar to the ones in the States. Any oddball looking vehicles weren’t as odd as the one pictured above.
I was excited to get home from work today to write a post for the Insecure Writers Support Group and it happened. I got distracted.
We became fast friends online. Donna told me of some scrapbooking conventions she and her girlfriends had been to. How much fun they were. The inspiration found at them, and just the whole girl's getting away having a great time bonding.
You can hear a lot of funny things working behind a bar. If you aren't part of the original conversation, the things you do hear may seem random and not make any sense. I recently overheard a few things that were said where I was part of the conversation and they still sounded funny to me:
He said sometimes it's the car battery itself. Other times, it's the gadgets on the inside.
I’m mad because I can’t just kick him out right now and be done with this insanity. I’m so tired of playing this game. I feel like such a hypocrite.
On Tuesday, PSNI intelligence alleged Mr Hickey had a role in the murders, and was one of many gardai and customs officers who forewarned the IRA of searches – Mr Hickey today denied all these allegations.
So know love
These separate storylines intersect at various points in the film, and Tarantino masterfully weaves in the missing details while providing an entertaining and humorous mix of dialogue and action.
More details about our EDD Audit service can be found on our website www.em-solutions.co.uk/environmental_due_diligence or for any enquiries please contact our Head of Environmental Management Rebecca Chapman on 0114 272 2270 or email: rchapman@em-solutions.co.uk.
While completely ignoring the questionable methods used to ensure passage of the law, the Plaintiff- Appellee; Theodore E. Wymyslo, M.D., Director of the Ohio Department of Health offers the usual, and not unexpected "The Law is on our side" rhetoric, along with the Statement of Case Facts, and citation of 112 “Authorities” in support of their claims. But interestingly, the brief also includes two appendices worth mentioning.
So Bialetti, you can understand how, after this ordeal, you became a long-lost hope in my eyes the moment I saw you. It was my last full day in the Italian capital and I simply needed to seize the desperate opportunity. Despite your hefty price, I bought you.
They have now become more politically active, a reminiscent of the 1960s. Today the issue of free education and treatment of students has made Bersih 3.0 highly emotive among many younger Malaysians, and their turnout will be a test for how the ground is moving.
Oh and guess what! On the horror story Trifextra Week Ten Writing Challenge, my piece Mass came in second! Thanks again John for introducing me to Trifecta! As you can tell, I will be using this competition as a way to sharpen my skill set as well as learn from the wonderful writers and community Trifecta has! I encourage you to join in the fun!
Some of my favourite excerpts:
'Blessed be Abram by G-d most High, Creator of the heavens and the earth. And blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies into your hand.'
Labels:Pretty Mess Records
Also check out this video: Weekend Roundup of Olympic Resistance (it won't embed or I'd just put it here), to see what went down in terms of anti-Olympic protesting in Vancouver this past weekend.
Harviestoun Brewery Ltd. Old Engine Oil
Working half a kilometre away on the other side of the reserve have been the CaN volunteers whose programme is managed by British Trust for Conservation Volunteers Cymru, another partner organisation in The Grasslands Trust’s work at Carmel. They have been busy opening up a new trail around a part of the reserve that visitors have previously not had access to. This area used to consist of a mix of grassland and dry heath but once again the lack of grazing has meant that these habitats have shrunk and in this particular case bracken has been the one to take advantage. The Grasslands Trust has already begun to reduce the dominance of this plant and the five hundred meters of new trail will enable visitors to see close-up the changes to the flora that happen in this area.
Btw, Senator Enrile is now using Facebook Timeline. You may now view his personal photos taken during the Renaissance.
Looking at it from a post Spike-Lee perspective, The Pawnbroker displays a white, liberal fear of portraying blacks specifically in any sort of negative light. So there are certain multi-cultural social groupings in the film that are a little bit bogus. On the other hand, there are individual depictions across all the races that are remarkably progressive for their diverse inclusion and veracity. Over all, The Pawnbroker stands today as one of the great pieces of New York neo-realism, and I use the latter category precisely to suggest that the American development in the 60s probably best represented by Lumet is coming out of certain fundamentals of the Italian development in the 40s.
“Miss Ann tells me that you have some unfinished business that has kept you here. She also tells me that you’re close to finding out what it is. I strongly suggest you see to that immediately. You will probably see you light again, your invitation to Heaven, when you’ve learned all you seek. Please don’t hesitate. Go to it.”
»Scene 5: iCarly studio«
After a week of Lagers in beaut Chiang Mai I was craving a good 'ol ale! Had a stein of the Dunkel to start off nice roasty choc malt on the nose and a faint noble hop aroma. Wow... on the mouth full it was very malty and caramelly in taste and smooth as! It was more like a robust porter beer than a German style Dunkle. The Weizen was very nice too! Big banana and clove notes on the nose true to style, very cold creamy and refreshing going down as a good Weizen should be! It filled me up quite quickly though due to the wheat malts and having close to a litre of Dunkle before! Now the Lager....Now this was a big surprise! No big hop aroma but a subtle scent of a noble hop was there along with a good fresh somewhat pilsner malt grain tone. Mmmmm....nice and cold going down like a Lager should be with a awesome very well balanced bitter after taste! Easily the best lager I had on my Malaysia/Thailand trip! I can see why this was the most favored brew at the venue! Could of drank it all night...and almost did!
Before I explain it, it though it would be best to give you an example. These are two clips I took from the most recent Evangelion Movie, with the Japanese seiyuu (voice actors) speaking in English. Exciting, right? Dear god Kaji...
a houseless porch near a back road curving back
Following are excerpts from an interview with Sheik Yousef Al-Qaradhawi, which aired on Qatar TV on August 26, 2006.
The 5th of May is not nearly celebrated in Mexico as in the USA. 5 de Mayo marks a day in the year 1862, when the Mexican Army won a battle in Puebla, Mexico against the French Army. General Ignacio de Zaragoza fortified the Cerro de Guadalupe against the French invaders, and on May 5th 1862, his 2000 men defeated a frontal attack by 6000, many handicapped by diarrhea. This rare Mexican military is the excuse for annual celebrations and hundreds of streets named 5 de Mayo. Few seem to remember that the following year the reinforced French took Puebla and occupied the city until 1867. Touché! Nowadays on 5th of May, all Mexican men that registered for military service have to swear their loyalty to the national flag and the institutions that they represent. This year it will be 150 years since the Battle of Puebla and the city Puebla will host a unique festival with a re-enactment of the battle.
Mil desculpas por abandonar o blog assim. Mas ja comecei os trabalhos de reupar tudo que esta fora e colocar mais um monte de coisas aqui... espero que acompanhem, gostem e comentem!
I think the biggest question is this: Is Luck/RGIII ready to 1) take over a legend’s role on the team and 2) bring this team back from a bottom-feeder to a title contender?
We've been making this dish for more than five years now, and we're always finding new ways to tweak it.
Melt 50g white chocolate, cool slightly and add to the butter. Beat until smooth.
All you have to do is leave me a comment here on this post. I would love to have you as a follower, but it is NOT required to win the candy. If you are a follower, please post a second time for a second chance to win. Feedblitz, Google Reader, Google...it's all the same to me! House Mouse Teamies are eligible too! Can't leave anyone out!
“Come,” a man of medium height, wearing a creamy oak colored shirt said as he pulled me into the group. Another fast paced, exhilarating song began and I could not resist its pull; I allowed myself to be swept into the music. Faces blurred as the man spun me round and round and round. Feeling dizzy, I concentrated on his mask instead. Oak bark and hazel leaves, and bright orange warbler feathers gave the impression of the sun rising in the east.
Bennett the smaller of the two just broke the 5 pound mark. Bennett is strong and doing very well. His big job right now is to learn how to take all his food from a bottle.
#618 ~ A new little black and white bird checking out my feeder.
But I’m still here. My kids still have their mother.
The concept is very simple. Mail a Birthday card and a dollar bill for a Senior who is having a birthday for that month. Since most are over 70 years old, it is my goal that they at least receive a dollar and a card for each year of their life. How fun and special this will be, and certainly make their day. What a great way to let them know someone is thinking about them and they are important!
We assumed that no one would try to pursue a scam claiming to represent the estate of the late Mr. von Niederhoffentanger.
There seems to be a sort of blog rat race going on that I am quite happy to watch scurrying by me as it heads towards its inevitable end off Blogger Burnout Cliff. Lately I got a whiff of some competition to leave 500 comments. Have you all gone completely mad? Between your jobs, posting, facebooking and twittering and setting yourselves these unreasonable goals do you actually have time to do anything else? If you are posting daily chances are people like me are only getting around to read one fifth of your posts anyway or skim read several in one Google reader fest.
me at the urinal trough. And whether
*) Recognize polygamous marriages for tax purposes in the United Kingdom.
Once I sat down to eat my specialty burrito, Jack walked up with two crab tacos. “Not my first choice,” he said. “But still pretty good.” We decided to stroll beside the marina as we ate. Early into our walk Jack got a text from a friend who was coming to visit. In addition to these preset plans, he worked early the following morning. Our day had to be cut short. I saw Jack to his bus. Since our schedules don’t coincide, I kissed Jack goodbye, not knowing when I would see or hear from him next.
Dress: Geometry Clothing – Sophia
And we’ve been hanging out.
So whatever happened to that girl that said she was going to take care of this place anyway? She’s a real slacker.
I haven't done a Weekend Re-Hash in awhile, but I had so much fun the last few days I thought I'd share. As all you football fans and football widows know, this weekend is the Super Bowl...and it's being hosted here in Dallas! There are countless parties, events and concerts leading up to the big game, and we were lucky enough to attend one Friday night.
27. Could you be a pirate?
This book is a complete shock: it is creatively conceived, well-written, fully-documented, entertaining, relevant to both our bedroom behavior and public policy issues—-and it’s popular. People are buying it! People are even reading it!
10. Movie Marathon at Home
3. It'll be a lot easier to plan, especially if we have people bring us things from the States.
if each day a flower
Unlikely Cover Songs
The plans for the area have been on the council’s books since 2005, when the Logan Park development plan included proposals for new facilities for tennis, athletics, squash and the New Zealand Academy of Sport, South Island.
Serve: Room Temperature
Jo said, but didn't I find the writing absolutely beautiful? Those wonderful descriptions of the landscape? I said, yes, they were stupendous, but I thought that this was perhaps the key to the problem: although the narrative is purportedly a shifting intimate third rather than omniscient, on the whole I felt those descriptions were made from an authorial viewpoint rather than that of the characters. I wouldn't say that the descriptions were exactly touristic, but the sense of appreciation of the beauty and grandeur was often at odds with the situations and psychic journeys of the characters. Jenny said, Yes, the farming characters would probably find the landscape pretty grim, wouldn't they? As well as that basic matter of the attitude to the landscape, there's also the question of the metaphorical language in which it's described. I did think it worked brilliantly for the psyche of the skin doctor who buys up Loyal's fields to build himself an outback retreat, and whose emotional focus is indeed the landscape to which he looks for succour but which overwhelms him:
Although I have been super busy, I still managed to snap heaps of photos of all the things I love in Christchurch. When I do have the time, I plan to give you a little tour of my life as a student and some other bits of Christchurch beauty.
In an election year this carries noticeable risk. Especially when one has strong feelings and opinions about many things involving the human condition. This year it has been especially acute given all the attention lavished on the issues of what constitutes marriage, families, gender politics and equality. When this is mashed up with regressive social thinking, bigotry, hatred and exclusion, it becomes a big thought bomb. Today it blew up in my face.
This isn’t due to the fact that dragons are notoriously awesome punchers (which in fact is not a fact). From my experiences, dragons have short front limbs, so the movement of a punch would be difficult for them to achieve. The damage would likely be attributed to the sheer size of the beast. Imagine taking a hit from something that is around 7 stories tall. The mass of it’s arm/leg would be measured in tonnes. That’s just unbearable. Even if you could do 50 push-ups, you still wouldn’t stand a chance…
She’s gonna buy me a diamond ring
Sometimes when I get into this sort of situation, waiting is a helpful thing. Ideas can sort themselves out in my head after a good night's sleep. I also feel like the more clarity I get on ideas, the narrower my options become. I realize some ideas weren't really good ones, and I realize other ideas are better or worse fits, etc. I often feel like the "right" answer is out there if I can just clarify my ideas enough. That's what I'm trying to do.
Partially buried in the ravine is a 1940s or 50s automobile! All kinds of questions immediately come to mind when you come across something like this. The first obviously is how the heck did this get here? Flood? Abandonment? A stashed bank robbery getaway car perhaps? I wanted to climb down to get a better look at the vehicle, but seeing as rattlesnakes were some of the local wildlife listed on a billboard at the trail-head, I opted to admire this wonder from afar.
This January afternoon of 1855, the old Chief’s careful direction would be guiding his people, like or not, to a destination of peaceful reconciliation with those who were to come. Big changes were in the wind, and Chief Seattle knew this. The ancient ways were being compacted to legend by these whitish immigrants with their steam-breathing machines. In the face of narrowing options the Duwamish peoples had no simple, and no welcome, adjustments to make.
Everything is not equal in the same firing even with the same clay and glaze. I wanted the glaze on the carved bamboo plate above to break tan and look like the textured leaf below with that color green. I previously did a test tile with the same glaze and I liked what it did, breaking to a tan.
Previous protests had involved struggle - the shouting demonstrators would approach the Chinese embassy or consulate and refuse to move. Most of the photos I (and so many other photographers) got were the same day after day - lots of pushing, pulling and gnashing of teeth. Though I very much supported the demonstrators, I felt it was becoming predictable, and righteous anger is difficult to sustain day after day, for several hours, on an organized basis.
Then, when you turn from the index to the relevant item in the inventory itself, there is very often a fascinating amount of detail provided. The men who compiled the inventory aimed to weigh every piece of precious metal, to count every jewel (as well as the holes where jewels had dropped off), to describe every piece of cloth and its trimming. Nothing was too small to mention. One entry reads simply, ‘Item, one pearl loose by itself’.
While the tickets for individuals were $300 -- $250 if you got 'em early -- the lineup was well worth the price. The scheduled performers included James Ingram, Patrice Rushen, Brenda Russell, Kevin Toney, Kathryn Bostic, Michael Lington, Carmen Lundy, Ndugu, Greg Phillinganes, Sylvester Rivers, and Billy Valentine. As if that wasn't enough, the UNSCHEDULED folks included the likes of Sheila E., Kat Dyson, Marcus Miller, Stephen Bishop, Dave Koz, and George Duke. In addition, we heard some of the Jackie Robinson Foundation's up and coming musicians.
1 small red chilli, deseeded (optional) and finely sliced
I'm addicted to Kim Klassen's textures, love
The comparison above might be helpful for those with a similar colouring to mine. Yes, all of those foundtions match me; odd how they all look so different when swatched side by side. Well, the MAC Pro Lonwear is a bit too yellow toned for my liking, but it can be blended out to match. Colour wise, the Bourjois #52 is closest to Revlon ColourStay 180 Sand Beige.
Once they had their foothold they started to observe around themselves keenly. They noted that the animals of this forest were not half as smart as their forest; in fact they were quite gullible.
A year later I am still slight depressed, but not in a dangerous way. I have not had a manic episode, been suicidal or psychotic in a long time. I struggle every single day (hour) with sobriety, sometimes more successfully than others, but I haven’t been drunk in more than two months and haven’t had a sip of wine in a month. I am seeing a great psychiatrist who listens and understands. I think he has me on close to the right medication mix (and fortunately is remarkably limited and relatively side-effect free) and I have been diagnosed as bipolar. I have an excellent physician and have just met a good therapist. I have a supportive family (who didn’t abandon me over the past years despite everything I did to encourage them to).
-package orders
You can't stop the truth from getting out.
Didn't have anything t!m used this time, so I improvised. The pine tree stamp is at least a t!m stamp! So this is little black dog playing in the snow at Christmas - or maybe incased in ice, depending on your point of view.
Imagine. You. Because.
Label: Heartthrob
Before we get down to business I have a family favorite to share with you today. My family loves Mexican food and this is an easy weeknight dinner. The leftovers the next day are even better, and my family is not one for leftovers.
It's been overwhelming in our little house these past few weeks. If you remember, our boxer, Charlie, was diagnosed with terminal bone cancer a few weeks ago. Since then, he has had a leg amputated, enjoyed a few good days at home and was then re-hospitalized for a severe infection for five days. We finally have our boy home (hopefully for good!) and he seems to be slowly getting back to his old self.
Self says this genesis surprises people and asks whether, given the period in which the novel was written, there was no element of wanting to warn people of the follies of nuclear war in his planning of the book. “Writing novels with a message, I dare to say – although I’m sure there are examples to prove me wrong – is a sure road to disaster,” says Russ. “I think the best writing is done with what enters you and takes possession of you and doesn’t let go of you until you get the job done.”
I didn't feel up to working last night, but I thought I should tidy my desk ready to start. So here is the view from the glue side.
Kung Fu Hustle (cameo by the Buddha!),
It is the practice of some people, in making soap, to put the lime near the bottom of the ashes when they first set it up; but the lime becomes like mortar, and the lye does not run through, so as to get the strength of it, which is very important in making soap, as it contracts the nitrous salts which collect in ashes, and prevents the soap from coming, (as the saying is.) Old ashes are very apt to be impregnated with it.
I remembered reading that the ACV could treat BURNS!!! I quickly dabbed a small amount on the burn ( a slight ting) the burn WAS..about 1/2 and inch long and a bubble. Each day I applied a dab whenever I was in my kitchen...and before bedtime.
But here's the kicker. She can make the sounds. She says "ma" often in her babble but when asked to say "mama" she blows a kiss and when asked what sound a cow makes, she gives a glottal roar....the same for every other animal.
I received this link today to a video piece that Met Life has done for this particular service. Check it out. And if you haven’t done it already, no matter WHAT age your child is or how much money you have in the bank, set up an appointment. Call whoever is close to you and book a time. It doesn’t cost anything but some time to sit down and learn more about what is available. You will be very glad you have experts on your side, and your family will benefit from these things being handled and settled.
It was such a shock and I am still fighting the fact that I left him there and he died. The vet said that he had an unusually large tonsil and when they lay him on his side he suffocated because the needle made it so he had no control and everything relaxed. I pray that he didn't suffer. I feel so bad still. Now there is just Elvis and Isobell. Elvis watched us bury him but Isobell still wonders where he is.
My neighbor is a video game developer and thus for some reason feels the need to be nocturnal. Because of that I spend every few nights awake because my walls are shaking with shooting noises and even shouting when he is especially frustrated. Painting this picture vivid enough for you? Good, because today I am absolutely fried.
You can contact me direct on 0428418226 or email me andrewhalsallphotography@gmail.com
Like this post? Please share on Twitter and Facebook!
to protect the house of books with ferocity;
The prosecution were bringing in to evidence a video recording of one of the Congressmen at the hearing by playing the tape to the jury. However, he was talking about the evidence of the wife of one of Clemens’ former team-mates, evidence which the judge had already ruled as inadmissible. The tape should have been edited to remove this, and it had not been. The judge had no hesitation in declaring a mistrial and a hearing is due soon to determine if Clemens will again face trial on these charges.
Writer: Christopher Dodd
What we have to remember that it is the GOOD Beer Guide not the BEST Beer Guide. The back page of the 2012 Guide states 'recommends pubs..........that serve the best real ale'. That is patently untrue. Firstly, pubs are selected in February/March 2011 for inclusion in a Guide that is valid for a year from September 2011. It is obvious that the Guide is out of date as soon as it is published and will become even less accurate during the months that follow. Guidelines concerning the minimum bedding in time for new pubs/managers mean that pubs selling the best beer are often not considered. Wirral is woefully short of good pubs but the Cock and Pullet which sells six beers from local breweries in excellent condition won't be included in the Guide until 2013.
1/3 cup each of add-ins: white chocolate chips, Craisins, or whatever your heart (or pantry) desires
And Life is too short...
I'm back up and running after two days down due to the bots flagging my blog as spam - argh! It's so frustrating when you don't know what you've done wrong or what you can do to make it better. However, the blogging gods have smiled on me and everything is tip top right now on both this blog and my new one over at Arachneas Attic - *fingers crossed we won't have any more problems*
It took me approximately twice the time it takes me to shave my legs to get two palm-sized patches (mostly) hair free. While I will say that my skin was velvety smooth, it also burned. A lot. Although, what else can you really expect when you rub your skin repeatedly with sand paper? I would say that I will let everyone know how long it takes the hair to grow back... but realistically there's not point as no one should try this product.
Hannah Montana Music JamHannah Montana: Music Jam
Our Kroger Category Management Team has done much research on the practicality of keeping this item active in our stores. Many efforts were made to keep the item available because of its uniqueness to the popcorn line. However, our data continues to reflect slow activity and therefore low sales.
I'm a little freaked out to be doing this without him. Driving down is no big deal - I did that plenty 'o times back in the day. But doing this very big thing...by myself. I'm not that person anymore.
I made an excel chart that has multiple places this statement can fit into, depending on the frequencies in the statement is the pattern in the excel chart it would fit into. Each of these frequencies have coordinate value on the Cartesian graph chart.
As Ally’s wandering spirit wrestles with a deep longing to flee again, a young woman on the other side of the world escapes her life of slavery in the rock quarries of Nepal. A mysterious sketchbook leads Sunila Kunari to believe there’s more to her story than she’s ever been told, and she’s determined to follow the truth wherever it leads her.
However, if a young reader asked an on-point question about my inspiration or shared a personal experience, I honored that with the full attention and honest response it deserved.
Exchange enemies for love, spillage of blood
Mixed feelings. That’s what I’m going through right now. When you gave up a lot just for one thing. In fact, I cried. Who wouldn’t? You gave up a lot of activities that you know you’ll have fun just because you need to study the whole night. I worked hard for it. After the day we were informed about the contest, there’s a party waiting for us in the other University. My friends were going and I’m the only one who didn’t come because of it. Another thing, my mother asked me to help her to arrange the designs in her classroom, yet I can’t go, because I need to study, again. It’s quite far from our dormitory. 2 hours from here to there.
Bella Cupcake Couture
One last picture. Although most of the time he's kind of a dick, as I have mentioned, occasionally Simon manages to break out the cute.
If you have other ideas…or would like to challenge mine….feel free to leave a comment about this “Career, Creativity, Culture, and Change”. Or what you think could help provide the 21st Century skills for our college graduates.
(The Mr. claims I catch on fire at night. Who knew?)
On the evening of Friday, May 4, prior to celebrating Great Vespers, Bishop-elect Alexander made his public acceptance of his election. In his address he stated that, “when standing before the holy altar at the anaphora, the bishop images forth the one and unique High Priest, Christ, Who acts through His celebrant.” He then added that, “while it is true that our Lord Jesus is true God and true King, it is also true that He did not come to us, His creatures, with the pomp and splendor of the King, attended by the legions of heaven, but rather in humility He emptied Himself and was found in the likeness of a servant.”
OLW86 Rules
Once out of the oven, wait for them to cool down (if you can... or you will burn your tongue and I'm talking out of experience...) on a wire rack and fill them with whatever you want! I did half with apricot and half with blueberry jam. I preferred the apricot once! Just for the fun I put some unrefined sugar with roses around them, a beautiful gift from a friend, thanks Delfi!
Percy Pollard
And in case you’re wondering, yes the grow light is purple. It’s an LED grow light my friend Coz got me for christmas/birthday a few years ago. I love the light and wholeheartedly recommend LED lights for anyone looking for a grow light. They never get hot and they’re wayyy cheaper than normal grow lights in terms of electricity.
The Lord said there is someone one here tonight, impossible as it may appear to you, he said one day when you arrived anywhere, everybody will stand up for you.
~ Visit at least 3 others and leave a comment.
One can argue that—like so many men—Nietzsche perhaps feels more comfortable expressing his romantic desires to a woman, than to one of his masculine peers. However, it is easily just as likely that this could simply be a case of Nietzsche minding his audience, and that (for all we know) he has some ulterior motive for the divergent viewpoints he expresses in the two correspondences. Whichever the case, the fact that the philosopher is overall quite open in relating his apprehension about not wanting to settle down with any woman, is by all accounts a consistent theme in his communications:
Political leaders have even begun to encourage the churches to preach social justice to win influence within the realm of the church. BUT they are not promoting the type of action in our communities that the Bible commands, they are preaching socialism.
I reached my breaking point, or the point at which I’m ready to claim back my body and execute control over it. Perhaps this is why my fitness/wellness crusade is going so well for the moment. Because I have taken back control and ownership of myself in meaningful ways – you know, like having a bra that fits.
Of the 394 restevek children they were advocating for before the earthquake, they managed to locate 283 — 7 perished in a collapsed school, 54 moved to a different location, and 50 simply couldn’t be found, despite a herculean effort to hunt down every clue and reconnect with the missing children in towns and villages throughout Haiti.
Anyway, Anna has lovingly named her elf JoAnn (my mother-in-law’s name). My daughter has a slight obsession with the name JoAnn and also with her maw maw. I think it’s pretty cute!
and Rah Rah college. He went to Williams College where after a short
The first time I had pesto was when my dad and I went on a hiking trip in Moab, Utah. Moab is a town in the middle of nowhere, and it's famous for Arches National Park. We hiked several trails while there and saw lots of arches. We ate dinner at one of the few local restaurants, and I ordered smothered nachos for dinner. They were gourmet nachos and had sundried tomato pesto and pine nuts sprinkled on them. I ate them like they were going out of style. Until....
91 not
I got up at six o'clock to go to the famous Sensoji temple complex in Asakusa. Going to a temple is new year tradition.
Controls are, well, never really having played a PC RPG actioner before it's taking me some time to get used to the keyboard & mouse control set up. Now I know why the trackball mouse is so popular among PC gamers. I guess I could go through the effort of mapping a controller but that would require effort. I like the quickness of accessing menus and hot keys of the keyboard but exploring and camera control still kind of pisses me off sometimes.
Vague references & images of the Heresy predominated many of the different books in both the "40k & Space Marine" rule & background books.
Clearly I’ve been thinking a lot about identity lately: Our identity as private individuals as well as our sense of who we are culturally, ethnically, professionally or religiously. How much of that identity do we manufacture for others to see, how much do others put on us, and what is organically real in our hearts?
carving out chunks of me,
I did something wrong…once.
This thing started as a print magazine in 1977 and now it's on this here interweb. We have nothing, nada, nowt to do with any festivals of the same name so don't send mp3's or anything else with regard to thinking that you'll be set on course for a career in the music business or anywhere else. If you do then you're wasting precious time and effort when you could be bugging the real culprits that are misrepresenting our namesake out there.
You know the bed feels warmer
The main difference between the original ship and the 21st century remake won’t be visible to the average traveler, however. Titanic II will be powered by diesel fuel rather than coal (the four legendary smoke stacks that make up the famous ship’s profile will be purely decorative). It will also feature a more bulbous bow for greater fuel efficiency and an enlarged rudder and bow thrusters for improved maneuverability.
THE LEGENDARY PINK DOTS
Since my first visit, I have attend 6 more, so I have a pretty good amount of experience to draw upon. The $40.00 price of admission hardly deters me. I am an extremist and I want to enjoy it all. I want every emotion activated but I don't care to linger too long on any one piece. I want to soak it all in and to do that, I have a well formulated plan.
As for words, we have three: Merci (which still comes out as "ah-see"), Cheese (the most exciting part of lunch, apparently), and Bravo. The only problem is that I discovered just this morning that Cheese is also his word for bread, even though he's known that word for ages now. Hm.
Stampers? Here is a little information about all
I loved her note for the kind words, but also because it was written on a note card printed with another original painting!
Well if that was not enough I just got the word yesterday that I have been selected to teach at the 2012 Firehouse EXPO in Baltimore Maryland! While excited I thought I was going to be unable to do it. You see I promised the wife and kids I would take them to Myrtle Beach starting that Wednesday during my 5 day break. Well originally Firehouse had me teaching on Friday, so I thought I was going to have to turn them down, because bottom line my family deserves the break. I am constantly doing fire service stuff. Last year I saw 4 out of about 12 baseball games my oldest son played in, this year because of FDIC I am missing his first game, and have only gotten to 2 practices just because of my regular work schedule. It is only going to get worse as my oldest son is going to play football in the fall, and wrestle in the winter, while my youngest is going to play soccer in the fall as well. I miss a lot and I was not going to take their vacation with Dad away from them.
pen has long been bleeded,
Skirts: 1
6. Hypnobabies classes are still going really well. In addition to the self-hypnosis tracks we have to practice with at home, I have to listen to a 'joyful pregnancy' affirmations CD everyday, and that has been incredibly helpful. It's basically just 30 minutes of positive thoughts about pregnancy and childbirth that you can repeat in your head. I usually listen to it when I'm taking a bath and it's been great to have that time each day to relax and think only positive thoughts. "Pregnancy is natural, beautiful, and safe"..."My baby is growing and developing perfectly"..."I am confident in my body and my ability to give my baby everything he or she needs"...Slowly but surely, I am really starting to believe these things and it feels really good.
10:00 – Revenge (ABC): A newly discovered photo of David gives Emily new clues. Meanwhile, Grayson Global undergoes an investigation by the SEC; and the press get hostile in anticipation of Daniel’s expected release.
TOMORROW: social commerce is expected to grow (forecasted $30 billion in 2015). The role of social media will continue to grow in the world of online shopping and beyond. From online to offline: the social aspects of the web will improve shopping experience in-store.
The second challenge over at "A Blog Named Hero has been set and this time its "Window Cards". I have had a lot of fun making this card as it has used a few different techniques.
We’ve been touring Flora Slosson Wuellner’s Prayer and Our Bodies last week and this week, looking for insights to encourage our pursuit of holistic body theology. Just as body theology is about not only our own bodies but also what we do with them in the world, so Wuellner’s book encourages prayer not only with our own bodies but also with our community body. She writes, “The nurture, inclusiveness, and sensitivity which we try to bring to our own bodies is precisely the same nurture, inclusiveness, and sensitivity we are asked to bring to our community body.”
As you know there are elections to Runnymede Borough Council tomorrow 3rd May 2012. If you have the right to vote please don’t waste it: Instead exercise your franchise and help choose who will act on your behalf in the provision of local services.
A Gathering Light: Bloomsbury 2003
Make whatever adjustments you need to the lighting, temperature, noise level, and other controllable factors in your office.
As for how to make them, there really isn't much secret here. I'll share how I make them, but everyone does it differently.
Q. What do you feel is Nigeria’s biggest problem?
The Doctor V the Alliance
THE GIFTED DEVELOPMENT CENTER has published its March communique, noting that GDC now offers all of their articles as free downloads from their website. Also in the newsletter: Anne Beneventi writes on the Annemarie Roeper method of qualitative assessment. Read more.
Bottom line, Mr. & Mrs. Foodie will be back really soon.
Paloma.
It was a bit uncomfortable to say the least
Downton Abbey
22 min: Newcastle are looking formidable now, hassling Chelsea into coug hing the ball up and then circulating it nicely themselves.
Visit our booth during show hours to see the latest from our manufacturers, take advantage of discounted pricing, and to schedule your new pool installation! Check out our hot tubs too. In addition to Jacuzzi and Sunrise we now
and then vanishes.
Food Poisoning Bulletin recently talked to Anna Schmitt Reichert, Director of Communications for the organization. She said, “our study found that the kitchen contained the most E. coli, Salmonella, yeast, and mold than the rest of the home. Most consumers think that the bathroom has the most pathogens, but that’s not true.”
Refined Sugars: 72 days; how long I have switched my sweeteners! No more white sugar, no more corn syrup, no more artificial sweeteners. I now use honey, agave nectar, brown sugar or Stevia In The Raw to sweeten things now. I don’t notice a difference at all. No one in the house has complained either.
Readers who love contemporary titles that are dramatic, humorous, and romantic, will without a doubt love Welcome Caller, This is Chloe.
The contest will end on May 12, 2010 at 11:59 Central time. The winner will be chosen by random.org. The winner will have 48 hours to respond or another winner will have to be chosen. Open to US addresses only.
Dead and Gone
We, Indians, are very emotional by nature. It is very easy to whip up our emotions. A well written patriotic song, a Bollywood movie where India comes out glorious despite all odds, is guaranteed to bring out tears of pride and joy. These emotions can easily be witnessed on our Independence day, everybody is exalting with Nationalistic pride, which is beautiful and frankly, normal. As they say, ” you can’t be an Indian and not be proud of the fact”. But, I am afraid to say that these feelings are short lived. They come and go with these movies and our National days.
PETER CASE & PAUL COLLINS REUNITE FOR A SPECIAL FULL-BAND SPRING 2012 TOUR, WHERE THE TWO WILL PERFORMING SONGS FROM THEIR BACK CATALOGS WITH THE NERVES, THE
There are so many good things here, it's hard to know where to begin. I will tell you that this salad is a powerhouse of nutrients but it rocks with flavor and the combination of veggies is really music to the taste buds!
Info links to protect your images
This was a quick romance tale which was fast and fun to read. Karina Bliss does storytelling very well. I liked that there were a few side stories which were being told so the reader became more invested in the story. You feel for each character and hope a positive outcome comes into the story.
Research a way to better store DVD & CD's (music and computer) without taking up so much space.
How do you get cooperation?
After she was cooped up again I brought my 1:00 back, and gave him directions. "Go on back, 2nd room on the right, have a seat and I'll be with you in a sec" (I wanted to get a Diet Coke).
3 litres Water (approx.)
I think that my discretion is based on a conversation with a friend of mine. I was checking out his band's page on MySpace, and among his “Friends” was Metallica and Marilyn Manson. When I asked him about his “Friends”, he said that it has more to do with illustrating your influences. “Aaah...” (cue: light bulb) From there, I figured that I should pick my associations sparingly.
First, we've decided to have a very intimate celebration (35-40 guests) in a town we still have yet to visit. To briefly explain, Jeff just recently accepted a job along the Mississippi Gulf Coast and we'll be relocating there in mid-April and planning a local wedding for October.
Sports Illustrated swimsuit viewerThe 2012 swimsuit issue of Sports Illustrated hits newsstands this week, but fans will be happy to know it’s been given an upgrade thanks to mobile technology.
We had a mellow week, for once.
“Charlotte took me back to see Meg. It just makes me cry.” Charlotte looked up into her son’s face, “Then I get selfish and sort of glad that I never had to fly overseas to sit by your bedside. I'm not sure I could have handled it.”
*It took the film crew a total of 4 years to make “To the Arctic”, which is only about 45 minutes long. Whew, making an IMAX movie is a ton of work!
Five seconds into the future, the lunge came, made unwieldy by the torch the Wilder didn't drop. Its arm would swipe across the passage, and if Rel didn't cling on it would throw him against the wall and knock him out. Rel took two of those seconds to measure the difference between going for the Wilder's right and left ankles - the right stood on looser footing, as the creature's attack shifted its weight left - then leaned forward, ready to drop.
Now all that leaves is some cake baking on Sunday for the afternoon tea planned at the in-laws.
And that lack of an answer is indicative of my greatest issue with Cube. It’s Groundhog Day for the terminal cynic. I don’t need omniscience but — at the very least — I want to know why. Why build the Cube? Why imprison these people? Why help them . . . or kill them? The movie does a good job of showing what and how, such a good job in fact that I doubt I’ll need to rewatch it any time soon.
The second step would be to then relax and take some time off. It sounds ironical, when we are talking about ‘using’ time effectively and extract as much as possible. But it is important to take a step back and analyze as a third person. This helps in being honest while critiquing your own habits and time handling techniques.
What great book have your read lately? "Spider Bones"
Here's a little tip I use to make those cut out stamped images look a little less snaggy:
* That you will think about using your real name for this, although pseudonyms can be given if necessary
One of the characteristics of marketing professionals that makes them so insufferably dim is their obsession with young people.
I initially posted the following inspiration look. It is very doll-like, and almost reminds me of a fairy. What I loved about this makeup look, was the white and orange together and the ethereal look it created.
When the path you were on doesn’t fit anymore, and the path you are about to embark isn’t quite clear yet, there is the space between. And yes, for those of you keeping score, Dave Matthews is playing in my head right now. I fully understand that the path I was on no longer fits me, but the familiarity of it is still very alluring, mostly because fear of the unknown can be paralyzing at times. That’s where the faith and trust come in. I need to believe, and live out, a belief that I am not only in the protection of God, but His care. And the real key for me today is the caring part.
I dedicate this post about shadow-boxes , what to do with a shadow box frame and nautical decor, and nautical decorations, to my inspiration, Bri with her funny and fab blog Me, you and a wiener.
There is a similar vein in the approach by Dr. Bob himself in his last major address to AAs:
I added another 5+ minutes of meditation at the end of the day, making an almost 15 total.
Armed with our bead mats, beads and a meter and a half of elastic, we began to weave.
But it didn’t. So, to recap, Charlie Sheen goes nuts and Ashton Kutcher joins the show.
But joy--the market works! Into this void stepped people of vision who foresaw a world of flavorful beer. You know the rest of the story--the craft beer revolution has produced a rennassiance in brewing and resulted in a number of breweries rivaling pre-prohibition numbers (1400, giver or take).
I also liked how the author portrayed small town living. As a girl that moved around a lot, Allie was always longing for a home. But when they finally settle down, she beings to realize that in a small town nothing can be hidden unless people don't want to see. Trip comes from a rich family and is loved by most of the town so no one wants to see him as an abuser even if it is right in front of their face. Allie is still the new girl and is far more susceptible to the town's whispers. She feels pressure not to start a new relationship--though she realizes early on that Blake is a good guy-- and to act like the normal widow. She can't move on from Trip because the town she lives in won't let her. Even if I didn't always agree with Allie's choices, the author did an awesome job making us feel the suffocation that small town living can offer.
Now let’s look at some of the proportional other states that aren’t winner take all. Now we all know that Romney does well in New England and the North East. So Rhode Island (19), Connecticut (28) and New York (95), a total of 142 delegates, it would be safe to say that Romney will take half of those delegates (71) bringing the total to 838.
It's super casual sporty kinda Mexican bar in our neighborhood that has two huge projector tv screeny things and a lot of tequila. (its a bit 'hollywood' for our neighborhood, but when in rome)
And what a celebration it is ...it's their 200th sketch challenge..whowzers...head over to the blog and check it out...they have graciously given a file with every sketch in it to anyone who wants it absolutely free!...
When I pointed out to her that the MMR vaccine she was promoting had aborted human baby in it.
This is not much, isn't?
- J
Every writer needs a support group, and I have a wonderful one. My friends and family have been absolutely fantastic from the get-go. There's something they always say, though, and until recently, I just thought they were being nice: "I'm so proud of how far you've come."
Me: “Josh, you tell me this every time we come over here and we never find it. What makes you think you can this time?”
Stamps: A Real Wild Poppy by Hero Arts, sentiment from Teeny Tiny Wishes by SU!, inside sentiment by Papertrey Ink
I'm off to pick up Carter from school and run Justin to the doc for allergy tests. Let's hope for good results! I always get antsy before a testing appointment. So hard not to get my hopes up that the results will be negative at last. Maybe this year?? Probably not, though...
Electric Products Building - Mural by Martha Axley depicts the use of electricity in modern industrial life. Architects: Walker and Gillette.
JAW: This is an ongoing dilemma, a paradox really, and elemental tension that I wrestle with. It is a question of separating and integrating at once the complex emotions, associations, memories and conceptual attitudes related to one’s home and family with the analytical and evaluative criteria of judgment. I want to translate and make my beliefs and values accessible to a larger world. The goal I think is to find a visual correlative in the world that translates photographically. I’ve learned to trust my intuitive gifts as well as my intellectual ones. I treat all with equal respect. In my best work you can feel that same genrative tension and conflict. You can see the tension of wrestling to keep all in suspension so I can call on any or all when needed. These oppositions are not so much reconciled as accepted. When I work, I try to hold making, knowing and judging in meaningful suspension and trust that what is necessary will come to my aid. It’s a matter of preparation, practice and attention. Of course this is a gross simplification of the process.
Revenant tactics: The bolts have less splash but suffer from the Wraith’s issue that they are quite slow. It’s hard to fire at small targets but the gun is a one hit kill. If opponents come within boarding distance boost away and re-engage. If you must engage warthogs, try and hit the side to send the pig flipping. Ghosts are usually too nimble to get hit by the gun unless you have a good passenger. Ramming is a little difficult in a Revenant, but good strafing and bombardment are excellent ways to pin enemies down for others to either kill or flush out.
-Majlis Pertunangan Azura & Zatu.
1 package Candian bacon (8slices) diced
Bowser Alcazar 2:19:661
For Crust:
Everytime we read about the “cost” of the war, it’s always in Amerocentric terms: We’ve spent almost $523 billion. Almost 2000 Americans have been killed and another 15,300 wounded. 1000 NATO troops have lost their lives. NO mention of how much the war has cost the Afghans. Shows that even so-called “progressives” hold this racist view.
I pushed on through the next few days even though with every moment of silence came thoughts of him. I began to believe that I was missing him. I would draft letters in my head of apologies. I wondered what would happen if I text him. I thought about calling. I came across a note he left right before I moved and we broke up. It says, "If you get lonely or bored at your new place, just remember that I am thinking of you so you are not really alone. I love you always." And another that said, "I miss you already". I started wondering if he really was missing me.
He'll be looking at my right.
Dearest Dani~
At the end of the day, 3.0 might have been passed by these days, but I still think that generation of D&D rules were perfect as transition fodder for moving people back and forth from video games to RPGs and so on, because the rules could work in both media quite well, and one reinforced the other. I'm curious (because I don't know) if there have been any video games based around 4E rules - my guess is no, but if someone can say for certain, I'd appreciate it.
- Struggled back and forth with indecision over whether to go back to tertiary professional level study, try for Equine course again, find a job or just chill. Got offered part time unpaid work with local Endurance legend and her team of horses. Have learnt so much in three months. Horses make my soul sing.
For our Earth and the universe
Every time we go to Ensenada I take hundred of pictures of the beautiful view, some are good some are not. But getting another day in paradise is priceless!!
3. Try buying in bulk! Now don’t go and buy perishable goods in bulk because that’s just silly, but think about the things you use regularly and if you buy them in bulk you may save a few extra cents to put in to you piggy bank.
the ‘tommy takkies’ being a new casual item
And why the waitress was wearing big glasses
I’m probably going to either quit this blog or not post in it often anymore. Evidently, anything I say is going to be horribly misconstrewed into some twisted meaning that I had nothing to do with in the first place. Right now, I don’t want to live. I don’t want to be a part of society, I don’t want to have to interact with people anymore. I’m sick of everyone’s lies. I’m sick of everyone’s deception. I’m sick of everyone’s plots, plans, and piles of BS built up so high that the truth cannot be heard.
It’s total assets were listed at $21.3 million, and in the paperwork for the filing they’ve stated that their sales have fallen more than 20%: “The economic recession had a devastating impact on higher-end fashion apparel brands, including ‘Betsey Johnson Fashions.’”
“While the UK is not part of that group, we understand that one idea under discussion is a merger of the positions of president of the European Council and president of the European Commission.”
Emmett used to hate the bumbo with a white-hot fiery passion. Now that he can hold his head up much better, it's more fun!
Stop reading when tired or at chapter breaks?
I turned to my mother and said, “You know what? I am so glad I’m not like that anymore.“
*1/2 cup sugar
I know how you wonder about your future, how you plan for it, how you want to know NOW what your NOW-15-YEARS-LATER holds. I’ll give you this: You own a home, a car, have a pretty stellar job, and a sweet, sweet baby girl. None of the names you have picked out for your children are what you and her Dad end up naming her. So, spend less time choosing your children’s names and more time on your golf game – or anything else for that matter. Don’t let your parents get you down on your studies – you are always above average in spite of their worries.
"Yeah. Just finished."
Of course! Had the family been liberals from New York, the story would not be nearly so convincing.
The last full week of treatment was 12th-15th May (just after Jake’s birthday) but the last dose of Cyclophosphamide was 18th May and that wrapped up Phase 2, the only thing is that I’ve missed a couple of lumbar punctures mainly down to unfortunately hospital problems.
Now it’s time to blame Bush. Remember the most expensive tax cuts for the wealthy in history? What did it get us? The slowest job growth in half a century. I’ll need at least another term or two to clean up that mess. You can’t expect me to fix everything during my first 100 days in office — that’d be Franklin Roosevelt, and I’m Teddy.
- Speeches – we loved the toasts given at our wedding, they were all very special and my brother’s was hilarious.
Fled
Because of South Africa’s role, both Namibia and South Africa have democratically elected, multi-party, non-Cuban, Non-Soviet model governments and a relatively free market economic system.
when you hear it sigh...
Telling a friend, her response, look at the spiritual implications.
A goal oriented seller will always try to steer the meeting towards points that they want. they do checks to make certain the customer gets what they are selling and manages the questions as opportunities to get more insight in what the customer really wants out of the product/service to buy it. Then the goal oriented seller will use this information to try to close the deal in this meeting or if it’s a more complex sell at a later meeting. but always doing everything at the meeting with the goal to close the deal.
may the light become a part of you
With the colour scheme picked I got to work making my two U.I concepts.
Mr Erakat urged the Israeli government “to do more about peace and stop spreading hatred”, the AFP news agency reported.
Whatever you’d like to have a conversation about.
A higher authority. Someone who will guide us, will take risk on us, guide us on reaching our potentials, or trim down the unnecessary baggage in our lives (that most of the time prevent us on reaching our calling).
The foam was thicker than I thought it would be. Plus, it only took one pass with the paper towel to get all of the dirt and drool off. With other products this often takes me two to three applications to get a clean look...even better, the smell was very mild. All of these things equal l.o.v.e.
I guess since there isn't a hole in the middle of this thing, it isn't really a wreath. Whatevs.
The springs and headlamps for the pickup have been delivered and headlamps fitted so Bob has a project for his summer holidays, now he has ordered a solar pump for the pond there is no stopping him, he see's it.... on to the laptop and order's it. The next thing on his list is a new sit on and the only thing stopping him ordering one is getting it over to France.
Must be the St. Patricks / Irish or Luck theme
Death is another key element in this movie. Miron’s wife Tanya is dead early in the film. The Merjan rituals of preparing the dead for their last journey take up a chunk of the film. The journey to the river to consign the dead to flames and the waters of the river provides opportunity for “smoking.” “Smoking,” for the Merjans, is when intimate details of the dead are revealed to close friends to facilitate emotional release for the bereaved, a rough parallel with the Irish “wake.”
Whereas the first half was all about floaty maidens with circlets, beautiful hair and slender arms picked out attractively by backlighting, the second half briefly became The Middle Eastern Baebes, which reminded me a bit of the incidental music of Gladiator and probably produced a collective belly dancing fantasy in the audience. It then returned to a nice bit of chanting about the circle of life in time to send us out to the pub feeling all winter solstice-y.
It's my turn (Donna) to design a sketch this week and I've kept it nice and simple. You can add a sentiment and embellies anywhere you like.
US Summit 18.0 % 0.25 oz 21.5 Loose Pellet Hops 90 Min From End
He loves you too…
02 Lies
Famine Facts
Because Midland is wealthy, people here are used to living as they wish. Lush lawns, swimming pools, trucked-in trees. While there have always been those who issued the occasional warning about our running out of water, the attitude was pretty much the one I overheard sitting in a bank several years ago when two White Men in Suits were talking about water. One said, "They say we're going to run out of water in fifty years," and the other said, "I won't be around in fifty years, so what do I care?"
Because it’s long gone now,
It’s amazing the number of humans who don’t understand the elementary concept of retribution. The principle is set out very clearly in your holy books. If people circulate malicious pamphlets about you, your response should be to circulate equally malicious pamphlets about them. There was plenty of mud that Ronald could have thrown at that incongruous pair of upstarts. He might have made the point that they were uncommonly ugly and very slovenly in their dress. And why had a man and woman who spent so much time together not mated and produced offspring? It seemed very suspicious to me. Did the man have erectile dysfunction? Did the woman suffer from vaginismus? The facts are unclear, but there would have been no harm in drawing attention to these possibilities in a crisply worded prospectus. Once a million of these had been circulated and read, I’m sure that everyone would have forgotten about the scurrilous charge of poisoning the customers.
The official has received various awards for "Good Governance" and best HR Administration in the Region. Inspection- and auditors reports on his section portray excellent results. His leave record and performance assessment results in general speak of a loyal, dedicated official.
I was so excited to find this French market basket at......GW naturellment. Have you ever priced them new? Very spendy.
Read my lips, no more tax rises.
(16 papers 12x12 + 36 elements)
Well, there’s only one Cameron, that's for sure! His character is his strength, and he really is a character; one of those once seen, never forgotten types. Despite his lazy tendencies, he’s razor sharp and has charm in abundance. He’d make a wonderful salesperson and is a natural leader. It wouldn't surprise me if he ended up famous; maybe a captain of industry or on the TV as a celebrity chef.
I started this blog with the intention of posting book reviews with the occasional article in between, since I'm not able to post reviews fast enough to do them all the time.
My blog is a mixture of my passions, desires and curiosities.
This is what CNN had to say about the show: “Commentators outside Russia have questioned the apparent link the show creates between Assange and the Kremlin, given RT's government-funded status.”
When I was a child, we had several holidays at a guest house at Arnside. It operated on a ‘house-party’ basis, with a ‘host’ who arranged social activities during the day and informal entertainment in the evening. Often the same people came each year, and so we renewed friendships each summer. One summer, my parents acted as hosts for the week, and I felt very important when they let me give out quiz sheets, or when I was given a part to play in an evening concert.
We never have any specific item we need to buy...
Parents! Extremely loving, extremely cautious parents who, rather than letting their kids navigate the slide on their own, put them on their lap and let gravity do its thing. The problem is: The thing gravity is doing is breaking their childrens’ legs.
I have to say, it's come a long way! I love the space now. And apart from adding a skylight and installing wood flooring it is DONE! When I told people what I did, the majority told me I was nuts for ripping out thousands of dollars in upper cabinets. Well I am nuts, so niener niener.
Fast forward through the end of my first semester, Final Bell, the summer of a lifetime, and First Bell to about 3 weeks ago. I receive another e-mail from Mick. He and Julie, along with their friend Terril, were in the midst of their travels and will be in my area. We arranged for all to visit and the rest is history!
The subsequent chapters then go into much greater details on the ingredients, procedures, chemistry and science behind Sake brewing. For example, you will find a brief history of rice growing, not only in Japan but also in the U.S. and Australia. There is a large section on moto, yeast starter, production with information and procedures for five different systems. You will find multiple comparisons between commercial brewing and home brewing, indicating changes that the home brewer likely may have to make. Chemistry lessons play a part, and some of the information can get very technical.
I know, all too well, that when these feel-good stories come along, that there is often little I can really say. Videos of the individuals being facilitated are often cut so that you cannot see what the person is typing at the time, or how the facilitator is positioned. But occasionally you get lucky, and you can, if you know what you're looking for, see the elbow cupped, or my favorite, the facilitator holding one end of a stick while the client holds the other; boy, the typing is fast then. Even more obvious are some videos you can find on youtube of a child being restrained as he tries to run away, as he independently speaks, and while the parent holds that arm and the typing continues. Paid facilitators would tell you (and do) that this is the genuine communication: the typed communication, not the spoken. See, there's a disconnect between the autistic person's speech and thoughts, too. Not only are the fine motor skills impaired, so is the speech, so that the only way the person can genuinely communicate is when the facilitator helps.
Actually, a little more than slightly.
This requires some calm analysis, not simple reportage…although to be fair to any commentator at the minute, highly significant events are happening so quickly – and accelerating exponentially – one almost has to report and analyse and project on the go. But do that for too long, and the result is plot-loss.
...but to do that we must keep pushing hard, dynamically and vigorously, evading the traps. (For example the meme spread by Fox that the uber-aristocracy and only the uber-rich are trustworthy, eliminating all other, competing elites.)
The only really easy thing about the game is that Hammond allows you to kill 100 of the non-rex-or-raptor dinosaurs before you fail. At first this seemed like a tall order, since there are lots of dinosaurs and they keep alternating between “good” and “bad” and “human”, so switching from tranquilizer to lethal weapons was somewhat annoying. But then I got fed up with some compsognathuses and blew them away with my shotgun, only to find that the limit of 100 is per level, not per game. After that, I didn’t even care. Only if I got under 10 dinosaurs remaining would my reign of terror end.
Witch Hill is a short but compelling tale. Sedgwick's skill is in the atmosphere and tension that he weaves and the emotions that he invokes. The description of Jamie's fears are heartbreakingly real, making his plight all the more moving. I particularly loved the references to the 'ancient' (depending on which history text you read!) chalk carvings and seventeeth century witch hunts.
The 1970s saw New York lose more than 800,000 residents, almost all of them non-Hispanic whites. This was the first significant population decrease in more than 150 years.
– gold nails of too-sweet milkiness
Czar, in coming up empty, made sort of an anti-theme haiku (for lack of a better description). Making the jump between perspiration and inspiration was brilliant (I thought). And I think the new word "haikuless" may make Webster's next year.
*In the coming posts I will list specific prayers from the 7 Steps to Freedom.
No doubt, Albert Pujols is great. His numbers prove him to be one of the greatest baseball talents to ever play pro ball. I get that…I agree with that. But that isn’t the context in which this question is asked.
Gardeners World, Britain
I told some girlfriends on a message board I’m on that the pain is hard to describe. It was like someone pinched me really hard in a spot that I’d never expect or want to get pinched. EVER. It fucking sucked.
Level 13: MP Cost: 60, Damage: 229%, Attacks up to 6 enemies 6 times, 23% chance to stun the enemy for 5 seconds.
Do you have a Flashback you'd like to add? Put your link here:
The outcomes of keeping recreational marijuana use illegal will save Arizona from the increase of drug-related fatal car accidents, and protect the mental health of residents. Smoking weed recreationally should remain against the law.
Evaluating open source alternatives to Microsoft Office
I am in awe of this particular teacher, who still remains in control of her mini-class:
That must be the worst scenario for a writer, by the way, to lose access to their keyboard. Typing out blog posts on an infra-red rubber keypad attached to an iPad just doesn’t cut it long-term, take it from me. I tried, and only managed a couple. (It’s quite good for reading, though).
Research and observations show that managerial psychopaths possess many self-serving and/or maladaptive emotions, such as: Arrogance, grandiosity, pleasure, anger, rage, hostility, contempt, overweening, envy, jealousy, greed, suspiciousness, impatience, and irritability. Because of their superficial charm, people often misperceive their impulsivity and unscrupulousness as being courageous and determined, and mistake their self-inflation and self-admiration as signs of self confidence.
3 offer
The same applies to all other natural resources that feed into the livestock production process, such as water or nutrients.”
A chaise was a pleasure or travelling carriage that was usually open and low with four wheels and drawn by one or two ponies. A Post Chaise was a chaise used with rented horses and was always painted yellow and often referred to as “a yellow bounder”. Post chaises were controlled by a postillion riding one of the horses.
And last year, law enforcement seized more than $2.5 billion, a haul that has more than doubled over the last five years.
Right before I met CJ I had a brief fling w/ a certain guy, let’s call him Abe, and it really was all a matter of friend association. We all hung out and then when it came time to pair up I wound up w/ Abe. I had been single for a while and drowning a lil in self pity. This man at first helped lift my spirits up. He made me laugh, told me I was pretty, and told me I wasn’t like other girls yada yada. My weekends were booked and I had a warm shoulder to lay my head on. But the other sides of his personality reared their ugly heads.
Within days, another South African company jumped on the bandwagon, brining full-force wit and satire with them. Nando’s, a popular fast food chain serving chicken, aired Nando’s Options, a :45 TV response to the insurance spot, produced by Black River FC. The set is the same- The Nando’s commericial opens on a man, standing in front of a bar, as he nonchlanetly talks, and the waiter is busy behind him. Except this time, it’s the plates of food the waiter keeps delivering to the bar that change. The man smugly asks, “Tell me, did you notice the meal beside me changed three times during this ad… Three.” The Nando’s logo and URL close the spot.
What is your favorite summer outdoor activity?
Tyroconnell 10 year old Madeira Cask Finish Single Malt – 46% £49 rrp
There's a part of my heart that make me love you. This is a book about how I love you. My hope is for you to be in my heart. Oh how sweet I think I am. It's a time to give you a present. I love you with all my heart. Love, Faith
I will admit that the thing that first suckered me in on this particular bottle was the label. It’s pretty basic black and red but is pretty sleek looking. (Idiots are attracted to anything “sleek”) Once I saw that this bottle was only $9 (at Target), it made quick entry into the shopping basket with the two other bottles of Wine I had previously snagged. (It’s gotten to where my shopping cart does lots of clanking of bottles as I wheel through Target)
The mister has done it.
However, the key thought to hold here is the recurring allegation that the News of the World editor at the time – one Andy Coulson – used his knowledge of the affair to both limit the potential damage to the rising Conservative Shadow Minister…and then wangle himself the key job as David Cameron’s media pa as a result of it.
Ayahuasca’s research have been done in Brasil. Other hallucinogens research has been done in the US.
Okay, its color may not have totally convinced you of its healing powers, but its nutritional value will. Switch up your mayo or ketchup for mustard and you’re looking at zero calories, zero fat and only 55mg of sodium. Get yourself some honey mustard and you’re only consuming 10 calories per serving. Keep all the flavor, but lose that inner thigh fat you’ve been putting on since the breakup. You’ll feel better, look better and have more energy in the long run. This is a time when you should be concentrating on you and what you need. Making tiny adjustments to your diet will add some control to your life, while other aspects seem out-of-control, i.e. your emotions.
Some of this will be relatively easy - I can set up a private forum that would suit the needs of the group. Some will be harder - deciding on wording is never easy in a group, and verifying licensees before allowing them access would have to be carefully thought out. To begin with there will be no subs - an atmosphere of support and donation would have to suffice, mainly that most expensive commodity - time. But as the group grows, it may be suggested that a small annual fee could help us spread our message more effectively. But as with everything, it would have to pass the majority test first.
One other thing I notice with Matteo is just how much he learns from Sebastian and Collette. The Hat song is one example. He also plays with cars (like, actually pushes them along the floor just like Sebastian and Collette do), tries to do puzzles, uses drum sticks on the drum, etc. It makes me grateful that they get all this time together. Not to mention the fact that Sebastian and Matteo have become like peas and carrots. Watching them play together is just too cute. The stuff us parents live for.
Great businesses are built on great business models, driven by great business leaders and are dynamic and adaptive to the climate it finds itself in.
As people in Europe, the U.S., and the rest of the developed world live longer and procreate less, their countries are steadily declining. Some projections suggest that, worldwide, there will be half as many children under the age of 15 as there will be adults over age 60. Fewer kids means shrinking populations, an aging populace, and economies burdened by health care and pension obligations.
Last year we went almost 2 weeks over from when they projected me to have the retrieval, my eggs were 'ok' but not great! This cycle I received nothing BUT good news---I went on time and perfect!
What will the future bring for Lowe? A memorable career I'm sure. Will he attain the same success as Reuben Reina/Alan Culpepper (both NCAA Champions, USATF National XC Champs and both Olympians)? I'm not sure. I do know watching him and German at the same school as Freshman should provide much discussion. Just wait for the discussion of Lowe Vs. Reina Vs Bobby Aguirre (El Paso Riverside) in XC. Never heard of Aguirre? You will soon.
Heavy Metal -- Clap Your Hands Say Yeah
Not so.
(Genesis 38:8-10, Jewish/English Bible, JPS 1917)
5. Activate Fantasy - As children, we all had these amazing fantasy worlds we used to play in. My fantasy world was a castle in the sky, full of fairies and princesses, rainbows and butterflies, flowers and birds. When we grow up and life takes over, we tend to forget our fantasy lands. But if you can think back and remember as a child, its when you were bored and upset, did this fantasy world come alive in your mind. It was your coping mechanism as a child. Why cant that same fantasy or a different happy fantasy be a coping mechanism now? Try it just for 5 minutes…especially when you are having a particularly bad day…I bet within the first five minutes you can break into a wide wide smile
In Mishnah Negaim, we learn that tzara’at can only affect houses in Eretz Yisrael, not outside the land. But it continues: though in all of Israel, houses are liable to tzara’at – they aren’t in Jerusalem. This is because all of Israel was apportioned into tribal areas, but Jerusalem was sort of an open city. It belonged to everyone, and thus, no one; it wasn’t associated with a specific tribe. Many of the people there were pilgrims, visitors, and it must have emptied out certain times of the year.
Under international pressures, Juba announced its intention to withdraw its troops from the area on conditions that neutral international forces would be deployed and that Khartoum should commit itself not to use the area as a base to attack South Sudan. Khartoum immediately rejected the proposal.
- I remember that, Dirty Jude. I remember looking up at you. You had black fishnet stockings on. I could see right up your skirt.
So I usually don’t use this blog as a place to write personal stuff or talk about pop culture, but this has been bothering me so much that I m going to put in on the intertubes and let it go.
Sorry, mama!
A former CNN Iraq correspondent suffering from post-traumatic stress disorder says his employers wouldn’t run footage he filmed of what he describes as a war crime by US troops, an Australian news source reports.
865,000: Americans That Have Given Up Looking For Work. (Bureau of Labor Statistics, Accessed 4/10/12)
"For many drivers in the Toronto area, there is no reasonable alternative to commuting to work by car," said Cherise Burda, the report's author and director of the institute's transportation program.
I want you to know all about me,
Mostly, though, it's because I like to decorate the house in fall and winter. I don't really do much decorating in spring and summer....
There have been many things that have made me question the sanity, shall we say, or the good sense of people when it comes what they do with money. Certain agencies of government seem to have no qualms about delegating our dollars to projects and concepts that we ourselves would deem absolute waste. Yet it's like a person gets a position in government and when an absurd idea comes before them they will often say, "Oh that's a ridiculous idea, we should fund this with tax dollars."
And my tale’s, say, the worm’s hind end
Keep in mind that these outlooks are updated several times by the Storm Prediction Center and could move around a bit. To see the most up to date outlook - click here.
Overpopulation
Because the exerciser is a weighted ball, it’s unlike something that is designed to stay inside the vaginal opening without falling out. It rolls out, and the goal is for the woman to be able to use her muscles to hold it in and prevent it from rolling out.
Amanpour: Diane how did the debate go?
Things like vacuuming the stairs while he plays in the parlor with the tube attachment to the vacuum cleaner.
Other times I get responses that are vague such as “get in better shape” or “get faster” which of course need some delving into. These general goals don’t provide much direction. After all, if you improve by 1 second in a 5k you are faster right? If you can run 1 minute longer than you ever have before you are in better shape. But is that what is really wanted? Doubtful.
"Mama, we're going to eat the frog's legs AND tongue. But mama, how do we NOT eat their germs?"
I pray for this day, Lord. May our upcoming worship celebration be acceptable to you. May we cast aside everything that hinders us and worship you with reckless abandon this morning. I pray for our worship leader for today, that his spirit might be one with your Spirit as he leads us, and that he, too, will be worshiping you, not just playing songs. I pray for Joel as he brings the message that is on his heart for us to hear.
On the internet there was talk of asequel to Guest House Paradiso, is that on the cards?
sugar 5 tbsp
Dr Ruth Vine said Professor George signed the petition "in his capacity as a private citizen", therefore he had not breached the code of conduct for public sector employees.
I have a picture in my mind of a dark curly haired, dimpled face little boy running around on streets of gold...sitting at the feet of Jesus...I often wonder what he is doing. I can not even fathom how amazing Heaven is and just how perfect his life is now. My mind can only conjure pictures of earthy beauty and I know that can not even compare to the beauty my baby boy beholds daily. I'm pretty sure he is not going to be having a party in Heaven tomorrow to celebrate his second birthday because time is not measured by days, weeks, months, or years there. Perhaps every moment is a celebration in heaven. I just do not know...but I do have a picture in my mind. It gives me comfort and peace to dream.
Oh and last night was oh so so much better, I still got to feed and snuggle my baby but I got some sleep too.
that no one squashes it. You understand,
He drives Miss T home from school, goes to teacher/parent meetings, picks Mater T up from Scouts, does the shopping and washing (Hmmm, I'm a bit OCD about my washing and after my good Witchery T-shirts were put in the dryer.....), takes Master T BMX riding for h-o-u-r-s, even arranged a run with Miss T this morning at 5.30!! Look I know that to some of you this sounds perfectly normal but in my family the Silver Fox has always worked long hours and was just not around for all the usual stuff. When they asked him to work on Saturday he said 'I have missed more than 9 months of Saturdays with my family, I won't be working Saturdays'. or words to that effect. He is also less stressed and is so relaxed.
Hillary Clinton's assertion that "we saw the free and fair election of
(p.s. Without my knowledge Saige made an old picture of Mr. Doodles the screensaver on our computer. Now everytime I logged on I am eye to eye with his beady little stare. Creepy guinea pig zombie!)
And tongues to be, your being shall rehearse,
I am sick-and-tired of people who talk in whispered tones about this “Kaffir Mentality” that is wrecking our lives. And when I say “people” I’m also referring to other ethnic groups, including several blacks who don’t think twice about using the word “Kaffir”. I know it’s an ugly word, but is it not time we start calling a spade a spade? Why should we speak of a “South African Mentality” when these issues crop up. It is not a South African mentality, it is a Kaffir mentality – full stop!
Police did not provide information about how many people were shot or their conditions, other than the toddler was a girl, between one and 2-years-old.
But in many sea floor, has found a number of large high buildings with exquisite carvings, and not from the cultural heritage of modern mankind, so surely the building that was created before he sank to the bottom of the sea. “
The commander thumbed his STU and growled into it, “Sector 84 Commander here. As you know, we have a commando unit operating in your territory near the river.”
Use a glue stick to glue the in between pages together. This gives substance to each page so you can add paint and elements. I like this blue colored stick so I can see where I put the glue. I've tried other glues for this project but this one is less messy and doesn't warp the pages. Make sure your cover every inch of each of the pages.
Just to clarify, I am not going anywhere, the goal remains the same, to write, network, publish, etc. I just had to change my URL. Thanks so much for understanding and being as awesome as you are.
“I slew you while you lived, I will happily slay your shadow,” Sharia swore, glancing about the room to see exits in the walls to the left and right of her, besides the one she entered through.
“Time as a stuff can be wasted,” Carl Sandburg reminded us in The People, Yes, as if most of us didn’t have some direct experience of just such a lesson. But the time I spent today reading The Lost Half Hour was without a doubt, time well spent.
We stopped at the little beach we had to ourselves a year ago, Playa Kenepa Chiki, and it was packed with tourists and natives. From there we checked out a couple other beaches we wanted to see, but all were so packed there was no parking. Like anywhere, the weekend is a busy time to be in the outdoors. Families are out enjoying the sunshine and warm water of the Caribbean Sea…
than i am but i do not
2. The first two sentences are a summary of the setting with some fun elements to set the tone. We have to know that the Academy is a school for spies or the rest of the cover copy won’t make sense.
The almost Dr. Seussian world of inflatable immigrant-detention camps, as explored by The New York Times, is perhaps evidence of this sovereign clumsiness.
5. The Love of My Man
Olive oil and seasoning
I’m an open heart and mind. I am accepting you and more importantly, I am accepting myself. A Salon Co-Ordinator at the moment in a sunny North Texas who spends more than I have but creates even more. A people person in a twisted way. A blogger and piss poor writer who refuses to give up. A daughter, sister, cousin, friend, stranger and a list of endless titles. Happy. Happy and hopeful is what I am.
For me it´s pretty simple. Something makes you smile, then it´s good, you feel like spreading it and that´s enough, no matter what the world thinks.
User Score: 7.7
“I have all her notes,” said Marlene, “in this notebook.”
7) List the first type of these things you think of:
Or morrow the marrow of her bones be thick
I find this argument fascinating in the US as well. Of course, once the bubble burst a premium was placed on renting as credit markets seized up and people switched to renting and were unable to obtain a mortgage. Yet once that short-term premium is exhausted rental values begin to find a natural equilibrium. Take a look at the Las Vegas market and you can see a tipping point in rents emerge.
73 degrees at 6 a.m.
6. What good would the Household Binder be, if it didn't help me keep my Household in tip top shape? The "Home Maintenance" tab is next.
I also love Dolly Parton. There's nothing more satisfying than belting out "IN MY TENNESSEE MOUNTAIN HOME, LIFE IS AS PEACEFUL AS A BABY'S SIGH" at 7.30am when your kids are having a screaming row about their toast.
With all the scares of prostate cancer and prostate health, this herb is great! It provides treatment for urinary retention caused by prostate enlargement. Stinging nettle also gives more added benefits for urinary health including: post urination drips, reduction of urinary flow, incomplete emptying of the bladder and the regular urge to urinate.
In iCan’t Take It, an unlikely partnership is forged with one common goal. Gibby and Mrs. Benson team up to break Seddie up.
“QVC achieved 6 percent consolidated net revenue growth including 2 percent growth in the U.S. and 14 percent growth in our international markets,” QVC President and CEO Mike George said in a canned statement.
Measurement of Hardness Scale
Parenting: Do we really need to be having children when we have to be reminded with public service announcements not to leave them in cars? Isn’t that sort of “The pot calling the kettle black?” I mean as a parent most won’t allow their children a pet because they won’t take care of it and the difference is…?
Last year I went as an author but this year I am going as a reader just because well they had limited space and I am no where in the ilks of big name authors, ie: Sherriyln Kenyon and Lora Leigh, to sit in a signing.
Location Chronic Fatigue Syndrome Advisory Committee (CFSAC) or -FROM HOME!
You know this type of communication: clauses get piled on top of one another, the speaker interrupting their own thoughts with digressions.
Decisions decisions
“Tanner. Tanner Talcott.”
After the game, Iker told Telemadrid, “the first thing I have to do is thank the fans for their support. There’s no need to think anymore about this, penalties are what they are, they’re a lottery and so there’s no need to reflect any more. We played well, we had a lot of hope, the team played good football, but Bayern is a good team, and we have to congratulate them.” I’m so glad we have a captain that knows what to say after a defeat! And our second captain also praised Bayern, saying they are a “equipazo.” I also loved what he said about whether he’d take a penalty again: “if tomorrow I’m chosen to kick it again, I’ll do it, because when you’re feeling confident you want to help the team. It’s a lot of pressure but I’ve always known how to handle it.” Meanwhile, third captain Marcelo commented that “we’re a team and if someone fails, then everyone fails, and if one wins, then everyone wins… we’re warriors who gave everything we had to win… we didn’t achieve the victory but we were left with the feeling that we’re a great team. Penalties are a lottery. If you don’t have luck, it won’t go in. Those who shot them have to hold their heads up high.”
But I did come across a couple of interesting things. Namely, other bloggers who have used that word in relation to themselves.
I am conscious that in all this, I am responding to Slocum as a character in a way I don’t often do. The immersive quality of his voice – monotonous, hypnotic – encourages this. And it may be too that this is a book which requires some degree of identification with the narrator (I said some) for the best effect to be achieved. Slocum, warrior misanthrope, may be the perfect travelling companion for the reader who in one sense views life as something to get to the end of before anything bad happens. (He observes, not with regret but with relief, that “soon after my children die, no one will ever think of me”.) So, enough of Slocum as a person; what of him as a creation, and of his creator? Spending eleven years on a fat, pessimistic epic of domestic blitz surely makes Heller just as nuts as his character. (That’s a joke. Slocum looks stark staring sane, despite a few homeopathic hints late in the narrative that he may be losing his mind.) Mostly, when a novelist takes a decade or more between books, it’s time spent away from writing; but here, it’s easy to believe that Heller really did toil on this book throughout the 1960s and early 1970s. And we are the richer for him never having thought – or never having succumbed to the thought – “What I’m doing is mad!”
Barbeque
So there you have it, Salty not only seems to run, but it goes down the road. It isn't the most comfortable bike in the world, but it is actually doable on the road. I just fold up my long legs, hunch over, and go for it. I'm going to fiddle with a few more things this afternoon, and hopefully take him around the block more before the rain comes this weekend.
1956-59 Your Hit Parade (associate producer)
The recipe called for 1/2 cup chopped walnuts but mom used 1/2 cup of chocolate chips instead.
I am nowhere special. Just at a coffee shop during the lunch rush on any old Monday. So few people are alone. A Mom and son sit across from me, heads nodded together in complicity. A newish couple behind me flirting: "You're hi-lar-ious" he just punches out into the sky, drawing out the syllables until she smiles unwillingly. Just beyond two co-workers, one shy enough that she laughs into her palm with a "Woowoowoo" like a cartoon ghost, her companion reacts with a hair shake and a whinny.
I wanted to talk to you guys a little bit about CSN.com!
dealing with the Jews. The Gentiles were called “dogs” (Matthew 15:22-27.) The Jews then looked for the Messiah, a Saviour, the very Deliverer God had promised back in early Genesis.
When I was growing up I learned so much of my humor and life lessons from looking at you. So please make yourself known to the world by appearing on television/the internet more often. I would be happy to list those shows but frankly there are too many. If you were drawn and were on television in the 90′s you should still be shown somewhere. I want to watch you and remember the good old days when I would get home from school and eat some Gushers and drink a Hi-C juice box.
The idea that my body has been holding on to all this mucus and god knows what else there is coming out, and falling off, tells me that it’s been a very long time since it had the opportunity to clean itself out. Yet, we have a machinery that is designed to do just that. In a normal, healthy body most of these things take care of themselves (although I still think all people could do with a regular detox) but in a sick, obese body none of these functions can be taken care of. I suppose my poor body has been far too busy just trying to work out what to do with the combination of chemicals, processed food and toxins I’ve been subjecting it to every day.
Politically, the voters were tired and disillusioned with the charismatic Mayor Lindsay’s promise of a clean and effective reform administration that would create a new and exciting “fun City”. Rather his policies had split the middle class from the rich and the poor, and undermined the City’s historical economic base. In 1973 Abe Beame, the unexciting organization Democrat from Brooklyn and perennial Comptroller, whom Lindsay had so roundly defeated in 1965 was elected Mayor on the slogan “if you know the buck you know the job.” Although Beame’s mayoralty from 1974 to 1978 would be troubled by the City’s fiscal crisis, for Hell’s Kitchen it would be a difficult but critical period in which events and decisions would lay the groundwork for the area’s rebirth into what it is today.
The art above the crib is from Etsy (Keep Calm Shop), an original pointillism piece by a close friend of my grandparents (the lighthouse), and a rusty anchor from a local antique shop.
My Latin is limited to such gems as "et cetera," "Q.E.D," which I use incorrectly, and "decimate." Actually, I don't know if decimate is Latin or just an English word with Latin roots, but I know the word. It does not mean "demolished completely," "destroyed," or "wiped out," even though that is how it is normally used. A group which has been decimated in combat means one out of ten troops has been killed. That's ten percent, folks. That still leaves a grouping of pissed off soldiers at ninety-percent efficiency. That's a little different than "wiped out."
Here in the northeast, with its cold winters, it's almost impossible to raise steers on a 100% grass diet year-round. We sometimes have 100% grass-fed beef available for sale, but most of our pastured steers do eat some local grain — usually corn — at some point in their lives. It's not a staple of their diets, but it's enough to help them get through the cold seasons when the grass isn't growing. Most folks think it produces better-tasting meat, since 100% grass-fed can have a strong, assertive flavor that isn't for everyone. We'll take a more detailed look at this topic in a future blog post.
7. The Green Leaves of Summer - The Ray Conniff Singers
Walking too fast to take a photo of the beautiful Rose.
Thanks for stopping by! I hope you enjoyed my project!
This is the corner at Gammel Torv where you used to find Café Stelling. A very stylish, yet relaxed place with great taste in design, food, coffee ect. They had a great range in magazines and I loved to go there for coffee and a read. But no more. Kafunky. Kafunky? First of all what kind of name is that - and then all the stars? Maybe I'm getting too old, but I just don't fancy it at all.
Eventually security came on the bus handed out cards that we all had to fill out with Name, address, social security number etc. Then we had to get off the bus and we were asked...
Of that 1%, we supposedly emit, the governments wants to reduce it by 20% which is 1/5th of .0000008 =...00000016% effect per year they would have on the world CO2 emissions based on their own figures.
The house is on acres of untouched land, by a river, on Australian soil. Good red earth, y’know?
Sadly, our target audience is older than the diaper crowd, so that sort of activity could get rather messy.
“Tim & his wife said it was from a broken heart,” Smedley posted. “That is all I know.”
The roaring torrents,
FACTOID: The film is set in the fictional town of Blithe Hollow, a nod to Washington Irving’s Sleepy Hollow.
12 p Family Fitness & Kick Boxing by TRIOMPH FITNESS
If a woman is not right, go and apologize ...
Baking powder- 2 tsp
Repeat with the green icing, filling in the leaf.
Add the coconut milk, fish stock, and fish sauce and bring to a boil.
Even if the mother couldn't see taking them out of school as an option, she could have done so much more for those girls than give them rules and try to make them comply. The girls sure saw not going to school as an option, and the very fact that their mother couldn't recognize that, shows a significant lack of understanding and communication on her part. I doubt very much that school or no school was the answer. Ditching school was more of a symptom of a larger problem, a problem that was created by the parents, their divorce, their move, their total lack of control over anything that was happening in their lives. School was just one more thing controlling them.
That’s it for the wreath!
Well that's the first week of 2012 almost over, it's quite scary how quickly time flies past you ! The card I'm sharing with you today is testament to that as this is for my Brother-in-law's birthday, which is today, and it only seems like 2 minutes since I was making cards for his last birthday !
New Orders Since end of day 01/31/2012, still outstanding as of end of day 02/29/2012
Nate Stupar was going to be high on teams’ undrafted free agents lists, so the Raiders made a good move snagging him in the last round. Stupar is an instinctive, intense backer with limited top-end speed. He will be a special teams contributor and offers more depth at linebacker.
Everyone will find their own ways of cultivating resilience and its important to remember that we don’t acquire it and then tick it off the to do list. It’s a practice, a commitment to yourself. The more you continue to cultivate the stronger your ‘bounce factor’ will become. Think of it as your personal tool kit, or the sword at your side, ready to go to arms when adversity strikes.
Update: The Sunday Times is a British newspaper. The item about Obama agitating for Israel’s return to the 1967 borders originated in the Times. Has this been reported in the US press? Recall, the first time we learned about George Hussein Onyango Obama, the president elect’s half-starving, half-brother, was from the British press. Is this the case with resepct to Obama’s direction with Israel? If the American press intends to abrogate its responsibility to report about this man, much as the same media neglected to report the truth about the invasion of Iraq—scouring the foreign news media will become a must.
But you are handling the chemo,
The bill now heads to the Senate, where related cybersecurity legislation has been stalled for years, and the threat of a presidential veto makes speedy approval unlikely.
At some point I’ll have to post about “Acceptable” technical graphics and the hidden semiotics of science imagery. Need more coffee for that though. After the gap – a bit of nerdliness. Click an arrow or something if you’re phobic about science (no math here yet – haven’t figured out WordPress equations)
Some of the new rules may sound good, some may sound bad, but you can be sure that, at the end of the day, they're all pointless.
I am 96 years old today, here am I sitting on a chair looking out from my veranda and pondering over my time and I made a wish as I asked myself this question.
As a designr for Paper Issues are here to inspire you to tackle those back to school pics, and even show you how to make a few cute teacher gifts as well.
As myself a citizen, I am always concerned about budgets, as it is a tool to use the country coffer. It also will help us to drive towards the future, or understand those statistic presented, to see how much lies in it. As we all know statistic tell lies. I am now thinking loud about this budget, is it worst or better than all the previous? Or it is just normal day in day out figures we see daily. One thing for sure, on this budget, I do not see anything surprising, or even interesting.
“We are based in O’Shea’s Irish Bar on Whitworth Street in the Centre of Manchester. 5 minute walk from Piccadilly Railway Station.”
Don't forget to click the icon above, which will whisk you away to more book reviews. Think spring!
* root device and root filesystem configuration:
The flipside, if you will, of that Alexander Tucker track, this smacks of the kind of magic where lambs are slaughtered under a blood-red sky and people mutter chants with burning sage: there’s something incredibly primal about Amebix. It sounds a hell of a lot like Pandemonium-era Killing Joke, and given that Pandemonium is one of my favourite albums ever, this is no bad thing.
This “organic” continuity can be experienced not only visually, but also with our own body and touch while these forms, guide and funnel the visitor within the space. People will eventually lean against the cashier bench, over the display table and step on the iron floor.
Panjak attempted suicide but was saved by his father. He attended Khalsa college with the intention of becoming a teacher, but his father formally disowned him.
I will be doing a lot of changing and rearranging so will post pics as I go along.
When we arrived with Mac and Dolly and a bag of unwrapped Christmas presents (which we then "wrapped" in newspaper from the kindling bucket and masking tape- it was like an Etsy horror show) I had this sudden realization that P. and I have unwittingly turned into Cousin Catherine and Cousin Eddie from National Lampoon's Christmas Vacation- remember the uninvited guests who show up for Christmas with their eyesore RV and dirty kids? Yeah. Have we turned into Crazy Aunt Lily and Ex-Marine Uncle P. with the two shedding dogs and the fiberglass egg trailer? My god, yes. Yes we have.
That you're in love with him and he's in love with you
Full name: RMS Titanic
Follow the reuse road.
Here are our translations of the track names, which we coined using our superior grasp on the Icelandic language:
Make pie filling: melt butter in a medium heatproof bowl. Add sugar and salt and beat well. Add eggs, one at a time, and maple syrup. Reheat over a pan of simmering water until warm to the touch. Stir in pecans.
I am in charge of America at the moment, and have been for some time.
The sea was calm, your heart would have responded
His world was crashing in
‘Unco Elvish fruit…’
And they saw a star in the west. It was the Space Shuttle Endeavour and she boomed through the sky, transporting 124 guests and their significant others and children, plus numerous dogs, cats and at least one horse. The first annual Masked Ball would soon be underway at the beach side home of Helen Tilston Painter, in sunny Florida, USA.
Dark reddish copper color, thick tan head. Heavy malt taste with a slight bitter finish. Picked this up on my last trip to Louisiana.
On my artist date I took inspiration from this weeks task to choose five ideal lives. These were mine:
This is considered a level of disappointment because these fans that were “happy” at the potential of McCool’s return were also the same fans who politely shat on McCool and her abilities prior to her departure from the WWE.
37Nay, in all these things we are more than conquerors through him that loved us.
“Thank you, baby.”
Lisa looks amazed!
The virtual cows contentedly moo in the fields.
The grandson thought about it for a minute and then asked his grandfather, “Which wolf wins?”
Dream keeper hidden and revealed, show me my destiny.
Cook's Notes:
Chapter Five begins the core of the book. Romney asserts that America can remain strong only if its economy is strong, and our economic strength is based on our productivity. Romney suggests that productivity is so important that it “should be a constant in the media and in the minds of citizens. And the importance of productivity transcends ideology. Whether you are interested in spending more on benefits or you want to add to defense, achieving your objective depends on the nation’s productivity.”
Commissioned by the EU Commission and the Observatory on counterfeiting and piracy, Rand has come forward with a novel methodology for assessing the scope, scale, and impact of IPR infringements within the EU (on which see a Current Intelligence article in this Issue: ‘Measuring the scope and impact of IPR infringement in the EU’, Marius Schneider, Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice (2012) 7(5): 313–316). It is undisputable that previous pan-European multi-sector studies on the phenomenon of counterfeiting and piracy have their shortcomings, either because they do not allow evaluating the scale of IPR infringements within the EU internal market, or because they are financed by industry, rendering them vulnerable to criticism. Rand's approach is to return to the roots of IPR infringements, to companies themselves, since they should be the first to notice that ‘something is wrong’ in their market.
Motivate yourself by giving yourself positive feedback along the way.
15. Sponsor: Obama for America, 130 E. Randolph St., Chicago, IL 60601.
My favourite part was the dungeon and its puzzles. I expect to have fun with that.
I hope you keep them coming in the future, as I do struggle to think of names for things :)
Last week I shared news about Take Part.org’s children’s story contest, in conjunction with the release of the movie, The Help. This week they have a new contest for short nonfiction. First prize winner gets a trip to New York to see a live performance of The MOTH Storytellers. Submit your 400-word interview with an inspiring person you know. Get all the details here. Deadline for entries is September 5.
In Blogland, the world is filled with colourful flowers, but my garden resists them. All except two tulip bulbs, which have sprouted up merrily from the same pot that houses my inexplicably dying blueberry bush. I can't tell you why they did this. I didn't put them there. These tulips are even more interesting because the gazillions of tulips that I did plant a couple of years ago in a border nearby have never even bothered coming up.
My kindergarteners have now spent the better part of the year together, working, playing, and learning.
There is even a Vegetable Butcher on the premises (and where else can you find one?), who will prep your veggies for you. In addition, you will find Le Verdure, a restaurant specializing in Italian-style vegetable dishes, so vegetarians will want to visit here.
Meet Lilly Craig, Brae's 6 year old sweetie. Thank you Lilly for answering some fun questions for Just ask the Kids!
Morello: Let’s save the best for last. Phreak, what do you know about Rammus?
Chris: Of course I have a vagina. And you know I do.
Growing up, I always loved when my mom made this perogie stir-fry. I thought perogies were the best. I loved them so much that when a stray cat appeared in our garage one day, I named it Perogie. He didn't stick around for long, but my love of perogies is still alive and kicking.
The Ron Paul supporters, known affectionately around here as Ronulans, are an interesting bunch. You’ll never meet people more committed to a candidate or case, you’ll also never meet people more delusional about their chances of winning. It is true Paul was able to fill a lot of college gyms for campaign events and it’s true that Paul’s passionate supporters will turn out in droves for every single internet poll. But that doesn’t translate into actual votes, something Paul’s largely young following doesn’t seem to understand. Unable to get more than 15% of the Republican vote, now the Ronulans believes he can out maneuver everyone and win the delegate count at the GOP Convention. It is the height of lunacy.
Kombucha culture has a wide range of organic acids, probiotics, acids and
Institute, which is run by Peter G. Peterson, who is married to a
You know the hygiene protocol that you go through with each child, teaching them to wipe themselves and wash their hands? Let me advise you to revisit that training every year or two, asking them to visualize what is happening to that towel if they are not using warm water and soap to wash their hands... yeah.
Screw it. I'm going to open that new bottle of Laphroaig.
I'd also like to enter this too the following challenges:
Practically a restaurant standard, most people don't realize that these lyrics, to the tune of "The William Tell Overture", were written by Bill Hanna and Joe Barbera for the episode titled "The Hot Piano".
In September 2008, Falun Gong practitioner Qin Dachun died after being held at the Xishanping Labor Camp in Chongqing city. He was kidnapped and beaten before dying at age 56.
Why I think you should see this: This film in my opinion is the best of the Bourne series and successfully ties up the story started in the first film. Matt Damon is incredible yet again and after three films it is evident that he is Jason Bourne. The action is non-stop yet again and supporting cast is great yet again. I absolutely love this series and recommend it to everyone.
“When I was your age, I never wore glasses in public because all my friends said that men don’t make passes at girls who wear glasses. The girls were called 4-eyes, half-blind, other things. Do guys still quote that line about wearing glasses?” I asked one time. “No,” he said, “my girlfriend wears glasses. I never give them a second thought.”
Below are a few of my top choices from SNB:
Glycowithanolides, consisting of equimolar concentrations of sitoindosides VII-X and withaferin A, isolated from the roots of Withania somnifera Dunal, have been reported to have an antioxidant effect in the rat brain frontal cortex and striatum. In the present study, the effect of 10 days of oral administration of these active principles, in graded doses (10, 20 and 50 mg/kg), was noted on iron overload (FeSo(4), 30 mg/kg, i.p.) induced hepatotoxicity in rats. Apart from hepatic lipid peroxidation (LPO), the serum enzymes, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase and lactate dehydrogenase, were assessed as indices of hepatotoxicity. Silymarin (20 mg/kg, p.o.) was used for comparison. Iron overload induced marked increase in hepatic LPO and serum levels of the enzymes, which was attenuated by WSG in a dose-related manner, and by silymarin. The results indicate that the reported use of WS in Ayurveda for hepatoprotection against heavy metals and other environmental toxins, may be due the antioxidant action of WSG. Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
Rimstead is highly critical of anti-theorists who do not suggest alternatives to theory; although she may support Christian’s position of “theorize, not theories”, it may not be sufficiently prescriptive (Rimstead 203, Christian 2135). Christian’s belief in intertextuality as information as a way of preventing the solidifying of theory within a movement may not be satisfactory, either. Kaplan suggests that non-literary sources may be of value, as well, an idea that Zandy made into an anthology (Rimstead 209, 211). The anthology is similar to one I found recently, called Out of the Class Closet: Lesbians Speak. There are some essays and poems in this anthology, but also interviews that were recorded and then transcribed as well as photos and other non-literary sources contributed by working class lesbians.
Thursday: high-level question, sharing and discussing the work with the class, and answer to question; HW: 30 minutes reading and 15 minutes practice
I've spent virtually the whole day packing and I need a break. So ... here goes nothing.
To demonstrate this saying, think about a recent vacation you took, once you arrived back at your final destination, back home, you realize what a great time you had and many people find themselves wishing for more of the vacation. The vacation was actually the journey, not the destination of returning home. Life is the same way; it is the journey in life that is truly important.
"Why are you asking questions you already know the answers to?"
I'm gonna go take a nap now.
I am no faerie Queen, Alas
Slow simmer for 2 hours.
-RKO on the chair! 1..2…THREE!
There is no significant difference between the normal and severe clusters. Notice from the plots that there is a large overlap between the normal and the severe clusters as shown in figure 2.
Next week, Torta de las Tres Leches for Hanaa's husband. I am trying to keep an open mind about a cake soaked in nearly five cups of full cream and skim milk, cream and condensed milk. I just keep thinking of those soggy tomato sandwiches from my school lunch box. Gag. I am sure it will be grand, maybe not so much for the lactose intolerant!
I've got a good one for you all today, my friends!
The awards are a great opportunity for the beer and brewing community to get together, catch up, tell stories and share beer. Do you really need any more than that? It is an event which makes us realise that beer is becoming more widely talked about in this country – not in quite the same hushed and reverent tones that wine is, mind you –and it is distancing itself culturally from the yobbos and dickheads who try to give it a bad name.
Find them in: Vegetable oil, nuts, olives, avocados, and fish are all good sources of mono- and polyunsaturated fats. Just remember that any source of fat–whether it’s olive oil or butter–is calorie dense. “One gram of fat contains nine calories, compared to only four calories for carbohydrates and protein,” says Bethany Thayer, R.D., a spokesperson for the American Dietetic Association. That’s why substitution is crucial; you want to add healthful fats to your diet while subtracting not-so-healthful ones to keep daily calorie intake on an even keel.
‘No ma’am. I come here to remember true beauty’, he said.
Local youngsters as young as ten regularly sprint past us as they tug their passenger-laden horses up the hill.
Scented Sweetpeas
Remember that oak tree we used to engrave our names on it is missing
“Being fully alive has nothing to do with the presence or absence of disease.”
here.
Will leave you with a photo of my latest collection - 'Pretty Pastels' - which I launched last weekend before becoming ill. I am pleased to say 3 of the 5 have now found new homes, but Lemon Drop and Minty are still waiting and hoping.....
The old year is ending in the frost---
Above and below are Calli. She contacted me about being part of i live here:SF way back when, in the early days. We went out for tea on a cold afternoon and she told me a lot about her life and her life studying fashion and art here in the city. And then for a bunch of different reasons we weren't able to get together to take photos.
I think if we really slowed down or stopped we’d get in such a headspin we wouldn’t know how to get out of bed.
Im tryin to not list this lot and sit pat here on the block..
Something cheerful, something bright.
How’s it going for you these days?
Wofford Alumni Executive Council
Education, as with all aspects of culture, is greatly impacted by the forward progress of technology. Several blogs are maintained by well-known individuals in the field of education. These top 10 technology blogs address technological developments as these innovations relate to education. Many of the top 10 blogs are maintained by those who specialize in integrating technology with education. Most bloggers on the list are renown in the educational field and all offer great ideas and insights for teachers and others interested in using technology to enhance traditional educational methods.
DISCLOSURE. in all i've read about and video watched it seems like all the believers seem to be pushing for disclosure from our government, i'm guessing from instances like the roswell spaceship crash and the sort and i'd like to know as well but if that's what they're waiting for just so they could have the proof, to me it's kinda dumb, 1. because the truth, i believe, will come from "one of us" or themselves touching down then saying Hi we're here where's the party at.?! and 2. why would anyone think and it seems like to me that's what everyone feels, but why would anyone believe if aliens made contact that they'd only deal with our government.? anyway.. the reason i'm making this post is because of a video i just watched that looks absolutely astonishing to me and if it's real i have a few observations.. one is "they" must look upon their ufo's like we do our cars because in this video alone there's many different ships in a short amount of time and by them being small it coincides with my "motheship" theory. watch the video if you haven't already...
We were up and out early the next day and man, was it cold! Athletica always told me she did better in the cold than the hotter weather. I’ve only raced in the heat it seems so didn’t know the difference. Her race was first. She did the half marathon. I did the 5K. I ran in a crowd of tutu’d women and a man with a giant fake moustache. People were pumped and their energy was infectious. What was really cool were the number of kids running. Dads with their young sons and daughters were clearly at the head of the pack. With the obesity problem for so many kiddos these days it was nice to see this. Even the announcer brought it up before the race.
From the time I had stepped into his taxi, a Premier Padmini 1992 Model, the Maharashtrian taxi driver, originally from Kolhapur, quickly spelt out his stand on the rule. “If the taxi is functioning well and also now that almost all of them have converted to CNG, why should they be banned from the roads?” A rolled-up copy of Maharashtra Times lay wedged between the rearview mirror and the roof.
Country Inn Resort in Corbett- One of the luxurious and eco-friendly resorts of Jim Corbett National Park. Country Inn hotels and resorts combine luxury, comfort and beauty to create spaces uniquely meant for you and your family.
Did I embarrass her in some way?
Looking For Eric
Here's one paragraph I wrote describing a view out of a window without paying attention to the tone of the language. I was just trying to be more intricate:
Open-ended questions typically begin with words such as “Why” and “How”, or phrases such as “Tell me about…”. Often they are not technically a question, but a statement which implicitly asks for a response.
Hawkins shook his head and opened the door for Sister Sarah. "Goodbye, Jack. Thanks for talking to us."
You are loved most profoundly,
Current Month Return: -20.68%
To put it simply, with the kind of visa I have now, I can leave and enter the country as I please within the one-year period. Last year the requirements added a clause that foreigners had to leave every 6 months and come back in and reregister. But that could be done by simply crossing the border into Estonia or Finland and then coming back in, even that same day.
Your serpentine was perfect, except that it was supposed to be a straight centerline.
If that hasn’t convinced you ask yourself this. Why did we learn kilometres at school to live in a world where motorway signs denote miles? Why do I buy petrol by the litre but milk by the pint? It’s just plain weird and pointless. There is no point to the hangover of the old imperial system. Like the monarchy, once all the old timers have all died off and the rest of us wonder why they had such strange attachments we’ll no doubt get shut.
For all of you who are in Canada, Happy Canada Day weekend! For all of the rest of you, enjoy the rest of the week & weekend too. Everyone should light some fireworks, no matter where you are!
Everyone is here.
yet when we read something funny
It all becomes worthwhile when…
He said, first, that if these artificial means were to spread,
LAWYER: Huh?
It’s no wonder nonChristians have a low view of church and Christians. We have a reputation of wanting things, demanding conformity, rejecting sinners, and pretending we are better than we are. It’s nauseating!
we feel even more connected to her and to all those whose lives she touched.
Being a realistic novel, the story is of now, the space is where we live and it proves to be a good past time occupying activity. Its easy on language and has a lucid vocabulary, so that one doesn’t needs to carry a dictionary along. Funny at times, it grasps the attention and turns interesting in several parts. The action seems to be condensed in the first 40 pages – love, dating, live-in, sex, college life, struggle for jobs, after which the story seems to lose the pace and give the readers a space to turn a few pages at times. Being the story of how and why the families fall in love the readers are compelled to stick-in upto the end.
or, well, it can be the epitome of serene… at least while sleeping beauty there stays in bed. luckily for me, lars will allow me to have a big whopping half hour to myself while he smacks the snooze button && gets in a few more winks.. so i can shower, dry my hair, and have a cup of coffee before he drags himself out of bed.
Two estate agents came to value the cottage. If we were to sell, which we aren't, neither would have the privilege of selling it for us. The first came early before I was ready, fortunately husband was able to let him in. The second was late. Neither apologised. Uncannily they both valued the cottage at the same disappointing figure. Considerably less than the larger house next door which is currently for sale. This is the very same house that I recently wrote about being two council tax bands below our cottage. It has the same number of rooms as our cottage, although it is larger. More space means higher bills. The next door house also has a bigger garden. Our garden is big enough for us. We do not want to have to spend all day cutting the lawn. Whoever buys it will be paying a high price for the extra space. Both agents said that the next door house was over priced.
Own where you are. Now, blaming yourself for everything under the sun is NOT the same as owning where you are. By owning it, I'm simply saying, you are where you are because of your choices.
In times long past, the first to live upon this place held great ceremonies and offered grand gestures to the Gods in hopes that the Spring would be long and temperate. Without the conveniences of modern man, small changes to a single new season could mean the difference between life and death for an entire people. Today, those small changes went unnoticed, save by a scattering of those whose job it was to log the specifics of each day and bleary-eyed traders pondering the long or short of it. They had been replaced by larger and more important changes such as the palette, collar-cut, skirt length and proper accessories of the season. They were decried by imagination mavens in four-color glossy explosions laid out across town in patterns so diabolical a Nazi minelayer would be jealous, but failed to reach the people as much as an early storm or late thaw in the last millennium. There were a few that had seen both, but they had long since left judgment behind and could not say which was better.
and yet when I get to that point I find myself going straight.
may implode.
And that, finally, really, was that.
I posted this on the 'Sustainable Natural Dye Practice' Yahoo group but I thought I would post my question here as well.--
ONCE UPON A TIME, a little boy with a big sword went into battle against Mister Rogers. Or maybe, if the truth be told, Mister Rogers went into battle against a little boy with a big sword, for Mister Rogers didn’t like the big sword. It was one of those swords that really isn’t a sword at all; it was a big plastic contraption with lights and sound effects, and it was the kind of sword used in defense of the universe by the heroes of the television shows that the little boy liked to watch. The little boy with the big sword did not watch Mister Rogers. In fact, the little boy with the big sword didn’t know who Mister Rogers was, and so when Mister Rogers knelt down in front of him, the little boy with the big sword looked past him and through him, and when Mister Rogers said, “Oh, my; that’s a big sword you have,” the boy didn’t answer, and finally his mother got embarrassed and said, “Oh, honey, c’mon, that’s Mister Rogers,” and felt his head for fever. Of course, she knew who Mister Rogers was, because she had grown up with him, and she knew that he was good for her son, and so now, with her little boy zombie-eyed under his blond bangs, she apologized, saying to Mister Rogers that she knew he was in a rush and that she knew he was here in Penn Station taping his program and that her son usually wasn’t like this, he was probably just tired …. Except that Mister Rogers wasn’t going anywhere. Yes, sure, he was taping, and right there, in Penn Station in New York City, were throngs of other children wiggling in wait for him, but right now his patient gray eyes were fixed on the little boy with the big sword, and so he stayed there, on one knee, until the little boy’s eyes finally focused on Mister Rogers, and he said, “It’s not a sword; it’s a death ray.” A death ray! Oh, honey, Mommy knew you could do it …. And so now, encouraged, Mommy said, “Do you want to give Mister Rogers a hug, honey?” But the boy was shaking his head no, and Mister Rogers was sneaking his face past the big sword and the armor of the little boy’s eyes and whispering something in his ear–something that, while not changing his mind about the hug, made the little boy look at Mister Rogers in a new way, with the eyes of a child at last, and nod his head yes.
EAU DE COLOGNE P6293
It's time to start walkin' down that Yellow Brick Road!
Arthur: Yeah, cause you and me, we made good decisions when we were 21.Do you remember decisions made at 21? Not always the best? Or are you one of those?
Mr.Griffiths also called for health checks on immigrants when he responded to a question in the local paper the “Smegs Telephone”, “Immigration should be limited to those of sound health who have jobs and living accommodation arranged before they enter.” This was prescient as there was an outbreak of Typhoid in Smethwick in April 1965. Dr.John Briant the Deputy Medical Officer of Health said ”Smethwick had contained one outbreak but another might occur if people were let into the country without health checks.”
I've been thinking a lot about the distinction between simply worrying and having anxiety, but in truth, linguistically speaking, they aren't that different in meaning. But in my mind, having a healthy concern for someone or a situation can be worlds apart from full blown anxiety. And, of course, everyone has a different propensity for worry/anxiety.
When I found this I was stitching ornaments on aida and always forgot to get back to it once back on linen/evenweave. But as Im currently back to ornaments but on linen this time I gave it a shot. So far so good. I used this trick on the Noel chart below for starts and ends of threads and see what I feel going forward.
Heidi was six years older than me and a traffic engineer, having graduated top of her class at U of T. She worked for a downtown firm, had a great apartment in the city and could make THE best fettucine alfredo. Oh, and did I mention she drove a BMW and drove stick? She was originally my brother's friend from summer lifeguarding but she soon saw my potential and took me under her wing. She's since moved to Australia, got married, had three kids and has climbed in her career down under. In short, she's still my hero.
Just finished another beachscape...this one is 12x24". Nice big size.
1/2 c packed brown sugar
Cara Scott from Daventry Northamptonshire, accused former lover David Golding, 28 and also from Daventry, of leaving her with a 'life sentence' and described the knowledge that he had given her herpes as 'soul-destroying'.
So Dr. Vet called with the bloodwork....the call mom always dreads. But Dr. Vet said he's doing GREAT! Yay!! One thing did come back a little high, and that's his cholesterol. Mom said whatever, he's 13, he's on a raw diet, what more can you do??
I have plans to visit Brazil in 2013… more on that and how you can JOIN ME soon…
elections would be held under the auspices of a coup regime, the UN,
380g (13oz) courgettes, grated with skin on
Soon enough the cage was sealed. The boy I never saw worked silently as Ilena's beautiful visage blossomed on its surface.
Postcard from: Otwock, Poland.
Speaking of veggies, I get a dire warning to “vary your veggies” with a big red X for failing to do this is making you older. OK, so in an average week I eat…drum roll please…eggplant, zucchini, broccoli, yams, sweet potatoes, mushrooms, carrots, some sort of fresh green beans, and spinach. Also bell peppers and asparagus, but only in the spring and summer because in winter they, like strawberries, are a sad imitation of themselves. Plus black beans, kidney beans and garbanzos (plus lentils too). Yeah, about beans – it tells me I should be eating more of them. Problem is, the test won’t allow you to indicate that you eat more than 1 serving of beans a week. Um, what? I probably eat at least 5 or 6 servings a week. Gotta say, a bit culturally clueless there…there are cultures where legumes are a daily staple, shouldn’t the test make space for people to indicate that consumption? The whole food section is very “stuff white people like”. Then it suggests that I’m probably low in vitamin E, and recommends that I eat sweet potatoes… which I actually DO eat, but there’s no place to indicate that. So I’m baffled – why not give people a wider range of veggies to choose from, and include the option to indicate that they eat beans if you’re going to count those as veggies? Were they high when they designed this part of the test?
Kate, James and Claire make their flight with Frank, Enos and Ricky Boy.
2. To undertake projects and programs that work directly towards eliminating drugs and illegal performance enhancing substances from the sport.
Others will be allowed to succeed in making great sums of money, or having a legacy left to them, or in having luxuries, but God may supply you only on a day-to-day basis, because He wants you to have something far better than gold, a helpless dependence on Him and His unseen treasury.
Thanks for taking the time to visit our challenge.
The Shadows of Kings Paperback is now available for Pre-Order at Barnes & Noble: Purchase link is: http://www.barnesandnoble.com/w/shadows-of-kings-jack-whitsel/1110607454?ean=9781606192238
Back to the story.
My father’s side never tried to kidnap my sister and I when we were kids, sure, but in the true sense of the word, they were Others compared to how I interacted with my white side.
I'm going to start with my absolute all time favourite. Every time I revisit this photo in my folder, I swoon just a little. I love the dark wood counter tops, the pendant lighting, the pops of white china against that greeny-grey in the open shelving, the pull handles, the shaker style cabinets, the dark flooring... just everything. No idea where this is from unfortunately! If anyone knows, please share because I would love to see more of the kitchen or the house if possible!
What He can do, is uphold your right to do whatever you wish, and He does. He will protect your right to ignore His Son, Jesus and all that Jesus has done for you on and off the cross. He will uphold your right to reject all that is holy, right, and good. However, this is not what He wants. God doesn’t want anyone to perish. His desire and will is that all come to repentance (2 Peter 3:9). God wants everyone to receive the healing work that Jesus made available to all. Is. 53:4-5 “By His stripes we are healed. ( 3 John 2) Beloved, I pray that you may prosper and be in health, just as your soul prospers.” Do you see in this scripture how God wants you to prosper as well as be in health?
2. FEEL the bar - this you don't have to do with wine unless you're into Champagne baths..
I prayed fervently that evening, even posting a Facebook status asking my friends to pray for a miracle as well. I though for a second, but why God? Whyyyyyyyyyyyyyyy?(sobbing dramatically)
That should result in a Republican White House and Senate next year and a Democratic House, but it won’t because we aren’t as smart as European voters. Most voters don’t actually vote about what really concerns them at all; they will vote for the incumbent either because it’s the only name they recognize, or because the incumbent has been reminding them of how many federal dollars and favors he has been able to “bring home.”
Now, keep heading straight on through and eventually you will reach street level again. Once you reach the end of the street, you can make a right back into Forest Park and after going under the bridge make another right which will lead you back to Steinberg Skating Rink. This loop is somewhere between 3 and 4 miles, night and day friendly, well policed I would say, and not hilly whatsoever.
Luckily the beer doesn't require any heavy thinking.
Who forgives your sin and heals you?
Now I leave you with a choice. Stand with me or against me. If you wish to stand against me, one day you’ll wish you hadn’t. If you choose to stand with me, all i ask is that you pass this article and attached video on to all your family and friends and ask that they do the same. The future rests in your hands. Choose wisely.
when my smile brightens your face
G.R. No. L-2756 August 26, 1949
I love simplicity with bedrooms - not a lot of clutter or furniture, but a few main pieces in neutral colors, and maybe a really fun colored wall (or a fun colored accent wall). I die for white linen too, which I didn't realize until I found all these pictures that, for the most part, have that element in common.
The turban above is apparently over the rollers below. You really wouldn't know it!
The ancient, air-condition-less mini-buses used to transport us through the desert brought us to a small parking lot that overlooked the courtyard filled with children. An L-shaped two-story building where the children lived provided borders to the left and straight ahead, and a small road through the property created the final border to the right. Beyond the road a little ways was the Pacific Ocean. Its cool breeze was gently swaying the trees putting the finishing touch on a perfect setting.
I hope to upload some photos from the Pumpkin's 2nd Birthday soon. Our French Poodle Hot Pink/Zebra themed party.
Honestly, to anyone still reading, this is really just for me. Feel free to read on, but I can't promise you'll find much interesting. I've realized recently that part of the reason I take so many pictures and videos is because I want to have cues that will help me remember things, have stories to pass along to Amari when she's older and hopefully curious.
It's been a great microcation. More to follow.
An hypocrite, unbalanced young lady
I saw some of my friends not being able to go out, do fun things, or choose to stop working.
Long. She did not FEAR sickness or death.
get ready for the ‘shocker’… Sherri Shepherd.
Right. Wednesday!
If I could offer you only one tip for the future, sunscreen would be it.
You will have to excuse my descriptions of any edible item in this and future postings as I am the opposite of that phenomenon known as the supertaster. I am that 25% of the population known as a nontaster.
I regret drinking that half price frappe from Starbucks earlier at 6PM (just because it’s half price haha), because right now, I am this freaking sleep-deprived insomniac with soon-to-be panda eyes. I want to sleep so badly but my brain won’t stop talking to itself.
Get back to me if you value your LIFE with all due speed or else I regret I will have to carry out my original contract to assassinate you and although he is quite charming for a horse I don't think Henry is the most sensitive of lovers.
FACTOID: This is Will Smith’s first movie appearance in three and a half years, the longest he’s gone between films since his film career began in 1993.
They show this by cancelling Kyoto, because the environment likes higher CO(2) emissions, because plants are part of the environment and need CO(2) to breathe. You don’t hate plants, do you?
Who went up on the chopping block?
And you might not be able to justify an etsy bill to your husband.
What they discovered shocked everyone in the room.
2. Thank the blogger who gave it to you.
2. For a second entry post on your blog about this contest and include a link to my blog and post the link in the comment section.
As Halloween has come and gone I have had the opportunity to reflect on my personal growth over the past two years. Once upon a time, not very long ago, I absolutely hated Halloween. I hated the pressure of creating costumes, I hated the way it made me feel uncreative and not up to the task. I wasn't fond of the slimy pumpkin guts that I cleaned out of each child's pumpkin. However, these negative feelings originated from the fact that I hated the candy. And as much as I hated the artificial colors and dyes and the high fructose corn syrup, what I really hated was the added negativity the candy brought to our house. I hated being asked over and over and over for "just one more piece." I hated trying to set limits and then getting angry because I was being pestered or I gave in and let the kids eat more. I hated my own desire for the candy because I really wanted to eat the stuff, too. My feelings about candy lead me to resenting the teenagers who came to the door in thrown together costumes "just to get the candy."
Spent the Holidays at Ayala Alabang with the family. Of course working at a BPO does have it’s downsides; no holidays. So needless to say I had to get to work on Christmas Day. I woke up early so I could have a cab pick me up and bring me to the office. The guard said there were no cabs outside the gate and referred us to call Tai Taxi. Now I’ve already had extremely bad experience with their company, aside from the over overpricing they had me wait for an hour. Anyways, after my yaya told me that the guard gave us Tai Taxi’s number my ears started to heat up this only happens when I’m about to get very very very irate. So I had my yaya call them.
GM: Control of people’s lives. Pricing – loaf of bread £1.40, 2 for £2. Why should I get a loaf of bread for a pound and it cost a bit more for someone who only needs to buy one? We can’t stop it. A lot more important stuff to be going on with.
Julien realized he had not been breathing. It was an amazing thing, breathing. Tears shone in Mama’s eyes.
That said, all can be enlarged with just a click.
Salade au Chèvre Chaud
Rev. W. Heber Wright, M.A., of Trinity College, Dublin, Vicar of St. George's, Worthing.
Jazz, classical, comedians, dramatists, any kind of auditory art can be found at Bass Hall. There, on the corner of 4th and Calhoun, I saw my very first piano concert, when I was nine. The pianist was Olga Kern, performing with the Fort Worth Symphony Orchestra shortly after her famous Van Cliburn win. I don't remember what she played, but I can honestly say that I have found such expression and musical passion rare.
I only did a few changes because I didn't want to go to the store just to buy some baking soda and butter so I used salted butter and more baking powder, but nevertheless the cake was (please note the use of the word "was" XD) still moist and delicious.
By the end of the school year I will assist our program mentor in giving an in-service workshop to our current teaching staff on how to implement financial literacy into their already existing curriculum. This will ensure that financial literacy becomes a staple in the learning achieved at the SBI family literacy academies.
Denny’s second win is important. For one, if the bottom falls out on this team, they are going to make the Chase as a wild card. Two seems to be the magic number to qualify if you are out of the top ten in points. Secondly, it could be foreshadowing who is a title contender this year. After coming up short in 2010 to Jimmie Johnson and a forgetful 2011, the FedEx boys with new crew chief, Darian Grubb should not be taken lightly. Think about this, Darian Grubb as crew chief for Tony Stewart and Denny Hamlin, has won 7 of the last 18 races run in the Sprint Cup Series. I’m not good at math, but that’s almost 40% of the races won.
The introduction of "fiscal" marks for packaged beer (cans and bottles) that you will already be familiar with on spirits bottles so that all can see that UK Duty Paid is visible on all packaging. This would enable the Revenue, as HMRC puts it, to "undermine the modus operandi of large scale beer smuggling operations". The proposed marks would apply thus:
My poor kitties. I know they love us and love living with us. Who wouldn’t because they are spoiled horribly and their every whim is attended to and they get the prime sleeping spots on the bed. But they have had reason lately to wonder if being “our cats” is such a good thing after all.
I really have been puked at a lot (that last paragraph got away from me a little…). When I brought Fiona home from the hospital, it didn’t feel real. I kept feeling a little like I’d escaped with a child and any minute the proper authorities would pound down my door and demand her back. It might be part of why I was so resistant to letting anyone hold her. What can I say? I have issues.
A rare group of vintage prints by Norman Parkinson
i about cried right there.
You may make a Chouder for a thousand men.
We also had 2 new additions to the farm this past Saturday. Baerli blessed us with twins! A buck and a doe! The little buck looks just like his sire. She had them easy too. I had been out at about 8 that morning to milk and noticed that her ligaments were gone. I'd heard/read that first-timers usually had long labors so I went into the house. We unpacked some more boxes for a few hours and the next thing I knew it was 11. So I went out to check on her and the babies were already out and dried off and the buck was running around! I'm glad that she didn't need my help - that's a good sign, I like easy kidders - but so much for documenting it!
We were to meet at 3:30pm on a beautiful Sunday afternoon in Coronado, where it views the Coronado Bridge and Downtown San Diego Skyline. It was the perfect day to photograph the girl with a million dollar smile and the charming boy from Virginia.
Some other staffing changes are in the works which would put me into a supervisory role and perhaps allow me to run things the way they're supposed to be run.
I begin most days by revising the previous day’s work. It’s almost like tuning an instrument and practising scales: ensuring that my ear is true and that I’m right on the ball. I read my text out loud, or under my breath, and always use a second colour to revise the previous day’s work (and a third when I revisit that) so that I can see at a glance how things are coming on.
To see more of Midnightcoiler beautiful work:
M 28 – This mag 6.78 easily showed stars across the core at 70x, appearing almost 3D in depth.
The British people don’t care about reform of the second chamber and nor can they afford the debates, consultations, referenda and restructuring that such a move would necessitate. Clegg should put down his latest vanity project and get on with fixing the economy.
Once in the area around the station you may want to drop by Au Laboureur at no 3, Grondwetplaats/Place de la Constitution. Like so many establishments in this part of town you will find a solid Mediterreanean influence - charming, exciting and with its large Morroccan population not without dangers at nighttime.
Greg Mandel is a psychic detective whose skills have been augmented by powerful but dangerous biotechnology. Those abilities have won him success and almost killed him many times over. Little wonder that he has settled down to the life of a gentleman farmer.
The private investigator or, in Sherlock Holmes’ case, ‘consulting’ detective, is a figure completely embedded into the history of the crime and mystery genre, but one with many faces and attributes. Many of the best known sleuths after all were not in fact police officers but men (and occasionally women) working in an unofficial capacity, acting instead of, in competition with or in parallel to, the official forces of law and order. This is certainly true of such well-connected amateurs as Lord Peter Wimsey and Miss Marple for instance but we would probably hesitate to actually call them ‘private detectives’ as there is something semi-official about that phrase, connoting a professional activity which we would instead connect more directly with the likes of VI Warchavski, Poirot, Nero Wolfe and Philip Marlowe rather than just a hobby for an inquisitive amateur sleuth.
But I never told you
As I mentioned at the beginning of this review, if you’re not a fan of Murakami’s writing, 1Q84 won’t change your opinion. The Murakami tropes established by his earlier novels – disappearing women, unsolvable mysteries, perpetually loose plot threads, passive protagonists, close descriptions of genitalia, endless references to jazz records, men cooking alone in sad bachelor kitchens – all appear in force in this novel, which is more of the same, except further up and further in.
Typhoid fever sucks. Last week, I woke up at about 3 in the morning. My entire body ached. I thought my eyes were bleeding. I had a fever of 104 degrees, possibly higher at times. In the morning, needing to go to the hospital, I really could not get out of bed. I’ve never felt so sick and so helpless. Well, maybe I have.
Read my other entries by clicking on these links:
09. Side 2 side (prod. by Trained Monkeys)
Pimpf — interstitial short story set within a year of The Jennifer Morgue
Chris Tse
- 200 g crushed tomatoes
(Where are the safe harbour provisions for internet intermediaries in India for copyright infringement cases? Where did they go? Did they ever exist? Image from here)
Put flour, baking powder, bicarb, nutmeg and sugar in a large bowl. In a jug put egg, buttermilk and have melted butter ready.
I hope you like these few doodles from my "archives":
In keeping with tradition, the Santiago couple invited Imelda Marcos, Heart Evangelista, Edgardo Angara, and Mar Roxas – something old, something new, something borrowed, and something blue.
Number 1 – Steve Gullick
And you’ll get the fruit of love, we call it matrimony.
Location 5, Clientele 3, Beer Selection 2, Ambience 3, Service 3
Wow, there certainly were some out of the box projects the last two weeks. Our April Fool's Theme had everybody scrambling for ideas but I think they all did a great job.
Unfortunately I didn't take any true 'before' photos, so picture a 70's man cave complete with half-stucco, half-wood paneled walls, a giant vinyl bar (maroon), lots of mirrors and no light. It was bad.
1 reappeared
While I would like to do use this activity, I have yet to find a reasonably priced digital frame. However, I love the idea of using pictures of words made with magnetic letters. One day after school, I took photographs of words I made with magnetic letters.
What you didn’t know is that I get to do super EGGciting activities like Easter bread baking and EGGography (I’ve just coined this word and it means “writing, stamping or drawing on eggs”) not for one, but for two weeks each year, as the Bulgarian Orthodox Church celebrates Easter according to the Julian, not the GrEGGorian, calendar and it is very rare that the two Easters coincide. So, we have two Easters in this family each year! What an EGGstravaganza! The Russians are even better off, because in addition to Easter, they also celebrate Christmas according to the Julian calendar, so that makes two Easters and two Christmases. I’d say, EGGregiously unfair! What do I do? I take a stance and I take an action, like this:
According to earlier statements by the police, the male accused also was found hiding in the ceiling, and police allegedly had also found a part of the murder weapon on him, together with Mrs Potgieter’s stolen laptop and camera.“http://www.facebook.com/topic.php?topic=11395&uid=52669367739#/group.php?gid=52669367739 )
Wolverine #305
Note: The process of sending out sprouts uses resources in the potato itself, making it mildly “squishy” to the touch. This meant that some of the potatoes that were further along in their sprouting process were pretty desiccated. This led me to question if anything else, past it’s prime and quickly becoming a desiccated husk of it’s former existence, could be revitalized the same way by merely burying it in the ground. So, I decided to try it out on my favorite MMO of all time…
Likewise, doubters should ask the ICAC to deny that the flow chart information is authentic.
Watermark
The world is a town in which unwise people
はち：で、第二章は愛のイルージョン。
If you turn on SportsCenter you might hear about Tom Brady, Kevin Durant, or Kobe Bryant’s leadership.
I just finished reading about William Lloyd Garrison, editor of the abolitionist paper The Liberator which ran from 1831 to 1865. This guy was fascinating, and his passion inspiring. My reading also gave me a good feel for the all-around anti-slavery atmosphere, especially in the North, before the Civil War. It’s easy to understand just how hostile the South was to the idea of emancipation for the slaves, but I was a bit surprised at the resistance to it in the North, as well. (Thank you, oversimplified history textbooks.)
I could not find the home for this one...but is surely conjures up many possibilities for a story.
The guide to password security (and why you should care) – Find out how your password security can be compromised, and how to create and manage secure passwords. From password creation to password management, follow this guide to ensure your data is safe, secure, and prepared to withstand a security breach.
International Role
"Isn't this exciting?" Abby danced around, her hair flying everywhere. "We're finally going back, and this time to Xenith, too, just like Mum and Dad. I wonder what it looks like now."
When I heard this would be an album start to finish gig and then a few hits I wasn't quite sure if I'd like it. In the end the 'album' was one giant 60 minute song and the 'hits' was almost the length of a regular set so it turned out to be pretty awesome.
So I open the door fully prepared to map out the quickest way back into town and he’s all, “Hey, ponytail. I hear you’ve got a big birthday coming up. Pack up the funny and break out your best PJs, girl. We’re hitching the big black horse down to Funky Town. I brought the doughnuts, ’cause you know, this is gonna be one long trail ride.”
In the past year my career has reached a point where things started to settle down a bit. Hapa found its groove, I added two amazing chefs to my team, and the food started to really reach people. It seemed like a good time to step back and take stock of where we had been, where we would be going. A time to focus in on everything that had slipped through my fingers during that first difficult year. Instead I wanted things to be hard again. I craved the struggle. The person who started this blog at one point found refuge in cooking. It was a place to find peace. Then somewhere along the way the stress fractures started to give way and a volatile mix of worry, self doubt, and anger...and for fucks sake it felt glorious. There was no more potent cocktail that could make my adrenaline flow and force me to focus in.
PLAAKKK…
Success comes to those that are willing to leave their “comfort zones” and reach out to do more!
The major epicenter of this type of sanctioned aerosol art is the block-long, 200,000-square-foot (19,000 m2) factory building complex in Long Island City, Queens, known as 5 Pointz (includes a link to the photo gallery).
I first encountered most of this album from the video Live in Pompett, as a kid I thought look at those weird hippies in an empty ruin playing, how funny. Little did I know that I listening to, probably some of the best rock music ever to be written. The live version of echos is outstanding too and different enough to justify the purchase of the Live DVD alone.
Red's Rye was right up Cathy's alley as she loves the red/amber ales. Just the right amount of sweet malt and hops for her. I had to agree with her on this, a very nice blend that was easy to drink. Pours a very nice red color with a light tan head. Could really smell the caramel, grapefruit and malted rye. It was such a pleasing blend of the sweet caramel and bitter grapefruit. It kind of felt more like an IPA, but I think the rye malt was what distinguishes it in the end.
I just wish there was someone else aside from the one person (Emily) that knows what it's like. It would make me feel much less alone. When does this stop sucking so much?
This month, I've enrolled in an April Scraplift Challenge. We are in teams of four, each taking a week in turn. I'm in "Team Trouble" (no looks of surprise out there) and I'm down as week three. The two layouts preceding mine are both delightfully creative and individual. An intimidating act to follow!!!
Read The Wide Horizon
When push came to shove, my skills as coder were more valuable than my skills as CEO.
04 - FVK – Sun's God
She pulled back, turned to grab her bag, and exited, leaving him standing there.
#070 Darin Erstad (Angels)
Celebration of Hope 2010 is the annual fundraiser for The Salvation Army Women’s Auxiliary and will feature a silent auction, a full lunch and a special concert by Dillingham. Anita Bryant is the Mistress of Ceremonies.
1/4 tsp pepper-(IMP* the pepper gives it the real mush soup flavor)
7) Continue to pan-fry the dumpling till the flour solution dries up. Carefully tilt the side of the dumplings to check if the bottom has turned golden brown.
Yes, that is the same girl. Draya or “DrayaFace” (they don’t call her face for nothing) said on the VH1 that she makes her money off her looks. She is very pretty but check her out without makeup and she’s a pretty normal looking girl. She’s pretty, just not the extravagant beauty you see on magazine covers.
It was the idea that you could have your soul sucked out of you via a kiss that caught my attention with this one. It seemed so tantalisingly good! The story completely lived up to the fabulousness behind the concept. My emotions were pulled this way and that as I lived through the torment of being soulless right along with Sam. Rowen’s style was so good that I could feel the desire to feed, to drain others of their souls as it battled with both Sam’s and my sensibilities of right and wrong. Add Sam’s best friend Carly to the mix with relationship issues of her own and you’ve got the perfect recipe for a wonderful best friend relationship to build these teens’ lives from.
I just returned from a ‘fabulous’ six days in New York. It really is a special time at Christmas with all the lights and excitement…..more of my adventures in a later post. I just wanted to share with you a must-get book for Christmas gift giving. I have just placed an order for a dozen to have on hand for last minute gifts for all the fabulous girlfriends, guyfriends, relatives, and for all the fabulous people you haven’t met yet.
I was thinking about the whole Florida thing while loading some hay this morning and I had to come back in and post.
05. Jog Trot
Dr. Leena also gave me a script for “prescription toothpaste,” marketed under the name “Prevident 5000.” Like I’m going to show up at some pharmacy and ask for prescription toothpaste.
It’s not just “retard” and “retarded” though. There are so many words the fly around that disparage whole groups of people. Gay. Lame. Idiot. Moron. Those are just a few very common, very popular ones. Words that even a lot of people who despise and speak out against the R-word think nothing of. Maybe I’m just too sensitive, too aware, I don’t know. I just know that I want my kids to grow up in a world where nobody is put down and marginalized because of race, philosophical orientation, sexual orientation, or ability level. A world where every human being, no matter size, shape, or color, is valued. If people as a whole are valued, truly valued, the language will follow. That’s what I think.
Now that I did my plug, here's some of our fun trolley photos!
Demolition Man
holding their breath kind of quiet.........
On the other hand, it doesn’t matter where an accusation comes from, the IDF must take a look at it. The IDF must look into every story from B’Tselem, every story from Machsom Watch, every story from Amnesty International. Not because I rely on them. I don’t. But you don’t have to rely on them to do your work properly. Look into every story. There’s a tiny, microscopic proportion that has some basis, so look, check, find out..
Student 2: Yes, you may give me a bug and a wish.
Wyner C – TwoCents Reviewer
Forget trying to pull up a mature onion from above the ground. Even if it has rained for a week and the ground is super soft and you may get a giant bulb when you pull, but you, my friend, have been fooled. The onion conspires to make fools of us all. A jokester. There in your valiant fist will be the green hair of its hollow tubular leaves and dangling like a beheaded Catholic in Henry the Eighth’s courtyard will be the gleaming white bulb. You’ve got it! “Ahha,” you think. But you would be wrong, because lurking beneath the surface will be half a dozen tiny bulblets that have peeled off, unbeknownst to you, settling in to live independently of the main mother bulb, just waiting to grow up, bloom a big flower of infinitesimal bulb-like seeds, the wind will blow and well….this is why they are invasive. You can’t get rid of them. I discriminate in this regard. I love every kind of onion for eating, all members of the allium family from garlic to shallots to scallions to purple onion. Equally in the yard I love the onions, don’t mind that they grow faster than any other of the “grasses,” think they are actually pretty in large patches and love love love the way they smell when freshly mowed. But in my garden beds? Gggrrrr.
I got to know of him through this verse:
When we begin to drive toward making things simpler, more consistent, and more
Self Acceptance starts by being honest with yourself about who you are, where you are at, what you did to get there and what you’re capable of accomplishing. It has nothing to do with the idea of who you want to be, what you hope to become or what you want to have. It’s who you are right here and now.
Many moments in Hold Still reminded me of Laurie Halse Anderson's Speak and of any/all of Sara Zarr's works. If you are a fan of either author, you should check out Hold Still. It's one of the most moving, honest portrayals of loss, loneliness, and moving on I've read recently.
According to Vaughan, when the 6 billionth, Adnan Nevic, was born to Sarajevo in October 1999, Salmon Rushdie advised:
He explained they've been open only since the beginning of this year. When asked why the name he reminded me that the previous name had been "Alpha Star". I don't know smokey's background but with all the Halal references and his complexion I assumed a broad swath from the Middle East to Southern Asia. Smokey corrected me, he's from Fresno.
(Lights out. They exit.)
The only things that I wasn't fond of, was that even when Fran decides which boy she wants, she's still willing to kiss/hug/snuggle with the other one. Which is, I might add, very heartbreaking. The last fourth of the book dragged slightly, and most of it is build up for book two, I think. There are supposed to be three books to this series, and I'm still very anxious to get to read the next one. (The only problem here, is that this one hasn't even officially come out yet. -head desk-)
- It will be dangerous for the person openly carrying the gun.
Minnesota
It is as simple as can be: mix the contents of the bag in a large plastic bag or freezer safe large plastic container. Stir in a bottle of wine and then fill the bottle with water and add that. Stir to combine and freeze for 3 to 6 hours.
Allow 7-10 business days for your order to be ready for pick up or shipment. To place an order, please email us at www.ontheavenuelogan@gmail.com or call us at 435-755-8471.
Enjoy the blog.
born: 3/27/1741
As for small happenings, Kira had her musical program tonight! Only Ben and I made it, which really disappointed her! She sobbed before we came, for about ten minutes! Then she kept watching the door. I felt bad for her! Then she started crying in the last song, because Ben was giving her the "boooo" sign! Good grief! I was working so hard to film everything to show Scott and his mom when they got here that I hadn't noticed! Poor Kira! She was already emotional! She did a great job though! It was eight songs, straight in a row, with no words! I'm impressed!
So talk to me and look for me,
In a sense, I discovered the cask version at home. It's home.
IMDB: 4.7
1) Though Democracy is a nice dream and a good goal, what it has become in recent years particularly in our media saturated culture is little more than mob rule. The problem is that often we have to make decisions in our society for the good of our society that most people don’t or won’t like (example: higher taxation), what happens is that we remove and approve people based on whether or not we “liked” their judgments not actually on whether or not they were or are beneficial to us in the long run. Like the mob we prop up a puppet leader to be our voice but there is little room for helpful critiques of our society.
As Mom and I have settled back into cohabitating as we support each other through this infernal process that is grief, one part of our routine is particularly precious: Wednesday night dinners. It's the one night of the week-- so far-- that we can count on actually sitting down at the table together to eat a homemade meal and discuss the issues of the day. GDA comes over as well, and we enjoy our party of three.
A young man sits stiffly in one of the chairs, leaning forward as if ready to pounce. He hangs on to his companion’s every word.
My Toms. When Toms first came out I first thought they were kind of weird looking, I thought "I am so not getting those." Well my little sister decided that she really like them and when I saw these and tried them on I was hooked. I wear them a lot and they are much more comfortable then I thought they would be. :)
I love how Sheila Rumney created this digital layout and cut a heart shape from one of the papers from CD # 1, Creating With Vintage Patterns. The hankie is also a PNG file , which means it has been cut out (even the lace edge) so it can be layered over other pages.
thrown the ice picks in the back.
6) "My bad!" . Every time I hear this it's synonymous with "I'm a f*cking idiot, please hurt me!!" and it makes me want to give you a swirly to put out the flames because you're probably dumb enough to have just said "yer fired".
People: these dishes’ signature, Sichuan peppercorns, contain THC! The psychoactive ingredient in cannabis!”The psychoactive ingredient in marijuana is tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). A couple other plants make THC in smaller amounts, most notably the Szechuan peppercorn, hwa-jhou.”
The most impressive points of the game are down to you regardless – those moments when you say, ‘Did I really just do that?’ What makes Crysis so engaging is the lack of linearity, there are always multiple routes to take, multiple solutions for every problem, ways to work around a seemingly impassable barrier. And they shine through.
Green Flash West Coast IPA- the pinnacle of American IPA’s
Taken from: Indicator 6th year – issue 9 February 27 2012
Morocco is Chaotic. Don't stop! Don't stop! It seems as though every time we stopped for any reason we were surrounded and hassled by beggars and absolutely everyone who had something to sell. Medina's and souq's are especially overwhelmingly chaotic on all levels: they are cramped, loud, smelly and colorful, they are never ending and winding. Shop owners yell at you, shop owners hassle you, people beg, loud music beats from Berber drums, colors stimulate you, stray cats everywhere, the smell of piss and shit overwhelms you, the smell of fresh leather, the smell of meat sizzling. The smell of all of these together.
Louis Vuitton replica totes include the craze amid girls, for assorted motives. The charge component naturally occurs 1st. Legitimate Louis Vuitton fees which range from numerous number of and also a huge $1, 000 as well as earlier mentioned. Genuinely a little too very much for the ladies handbag, now don’t you feel? Conversely, excellent Louis Vuitton duplicate totes charge simply a small percentage of these – about $100-$200. Consequently, by simply getting a replica Damier Ebene Canvas you can actually invest in numerous totes pertaining to the price tag on one particular initial.
Welcome to the new Daily Painters of Pennsylvania Challenge Blog for January!
Invented for the worst mistakes
Word Blog: Custom business cards within Term
We can easily become the parents who are “impossible to please” as we push our children onwards without much acknowledgement of all they’ve accomplished so far. It’s important for our children that we slow down sometimes and enjoy the fruits of their labor, not to mention our own. I can’t even count how many mothers have lamented about days and years gone by with amazement at how fast time flies.
12. Read the obituaries: “When the death of Arsenius drew near, the brothers saw him weeping and asked, ‘Truly, Father, are you afraid?’ ‘Indeed,’ he answered them, ‘the fear which is mine this hour has been with me ever since I became a monk.’” “At the moment of our death we will all know for certain what is the outcome of our life” (St. Gregory of Sinai, 13th century).
Grandma taught Sunday School for forty years. I have her bibles, hymnals and Luther’s Catechism, her German glass picture with the Lord’s Prayer, a primrose, butterflies, a bird.
The album, titled ‘Une Annee’, is said to be compromised of nine songs including the title track,“Hush”, and the previously released track “April 19th”.
They come in two sizes, so with five covers in each size, it's about $130 for birth to potty training for just the covers. BUT, two sizes means less wear and tear on each cover if you're going to be using them for multiple children -- and if you have babies close together, you'd need to buy extra covers if you're using a one-size cover, anyway.
1 pie crust
60 ml white rum
Right now this kid is in parental lock down. His dad is taking him to school and picking him up and then he forces him to sit and do his homework until he falls asleep, ready for the same thing the next day. He's grounded from coming over to our house, which also punishes Chamille. I really hope good can come out of all of this. Parents should spend time with their kids, they should connect with them. Hopefully the forceful lock down and babysitting will create positive interactions where father and son can work together on helping homework become something positive. The part that concerns me, is the sheer negation of what this kid loves, keeping him from seeing Chamille, may do more harm than any good that could come from trying to connect, assuming that connection is the goal.
Rather than teaching adults and children to find their commonalities, they are promoting “social justice.” Let us define the difference between equal justice and social justice a bit. Equal justice is what we, as Americans, and especially our founding fathers, hoped to create in this country. Equal justice is portrayed in our society by a blindfolded justice holding the scales. She is blindfolded as to not see your race, your religion, or your social status as a factor in applying the law.
KABUL, Afghanistan — A series of blasts have gone off in a neighborhood of the Afghan capital that is home to embassies and a NATO forces base. Sunday's explosions were followed by gunshots. The site of the blast was not immediately clear. Sirens could be heard through the Wazir Akbar Khan neighborhood. Pedestrians in the streets took cover as shooting continued.
Place cleaned chicken in large soup pot and add onions, celery, carrots, 1/4 cup fresh parlsey, 1 Tbsp black pepper and 2 Tbsp salt. Bring to a boil and cook for 30 minutes, reduce heat to low and simmer for 1 1/2 hours. Remove chicken, it will be very cooked so make sure when it is falling apart you get all the little bones.
“These figures show a worrying number of at-risk children in Wales have not been allocated a social worker,” said Mr Cairns.
“What’re you doing here?” Maverick grumbled.
o and Japan Tobacco International have brought a high court case to Australian Courts.
I don’t remember who I was or where I was bound
she planted them there
Another crew who know how to make a goo9d strong beer are the folks at the HardKnott Brewry. Having been given a pair of limited edition bottles at the Ale v Lager evening at the White Horse ages ago, I was eager to get stuck in. Howver, I soon realised I have night in and nights out. I have nights in for recuperating, for doing a bit of out of hours work, for cleaning, for laundry, all that dull stuff, washed down with beers of around 4%. I have nights out for drinking strong stuff that leaves your lips numb. So here was a conundrum. I was home on no evening that was suitable for a 10% + beer. These glorious Cumbrian ales sat untouched, waiting for a Friday night in. It did'nt come. They eventually came on the train with us (Boris hasn't killed that joy) on our way to the magnificent Dartford Working Mens' Club a couple of weeks ago.It was 7pm, the commuter looked at us as if we were bonkers, as we exclaimed the tatsebud beauty that these beers brought with them. Strong, yes. Lip numbing, yes. Drunk making, absolutely. Vinegary and eye watering, not at all. If I manage to get hold of any more of Dave's beers, I better plan some nights in.
Found some pictures online, not sure if they’re from yesterday’s show, according to the poster’s they are, thanks to Volkskrant, Jochem Geerdink (photos) and Michiel van Abbe, forgive me if I accidentally left your name out with regards to the pictures !
So the trip to Venal was short… or not too long in any case. Any fleet form up is like herding cats at times. There is that first 15-30 minutes of people joining late, wanted to know where the fleet is, wanting to know if they can catch up. And then there are the rest of us who just want to go go go and get to the destination and what exactly is the destination please and what are we going to do when we get there can we jump already or is the gate red and if it is do I have long enough to run to the store and buy some more beer?
Meanwhile Nestle has invested lots into 'shared value', and Wal-Mart has switched in its reporting from ‘global sustainability’ to ‘global responsibility’ in 2011. Nike, meanwhile, prefers 'sustainable innovation'.
Andreas Bulow / Culture and Revolution in Venezuela / 131
To shrive themself the old, the young, the great and small.
Afterwards, we went JoBoy's Brew Pub for lunch. The raves on Yelp commented on their exceptional BBQ. Both the manfriend and I tested those reviews with the sampler sandwiches. It's good - the pork and beef were definitely our faves. The beer was decent according to manfriend. I taste tested a glass of wine instead....
5, When everything has cooled and you're ready to construct your cake, simply lay down a crêpe, spread a dollop of mousse on it, top with another crêpe and repeat. When the crêpe cake is completed, pop it in the fridge for a couple of hours to chill before slicing.
Diamond: $999.
2- Deschutes Oak Aged Jubel 2000
Rnd 3) ch1, 2hdc in first st, hdc in next st, * 2hdc in next st, hdc in next st repeat from * around
The late Eric Morecambe would’ve said at this point, “Whaddya think of it so far?”
As far as school goes he came home the first few days really not liking it. I think he has adjusted now but it was tough for a while. I have had several conversations with his teacher about focus and organization so we are working on that too.
Of course I’m not going to leave you without some of the famous Unedited question and answers! So without further ado, I give you Michele!
Laurel was wise enough to know that, whatever this movie was, it was probably something we didn't want to be caught watching if her parents or little sister came down the stairs, so despite my objections, the channel was changed for good. I guess it wouldn't be a cult classic if everyone wanted to watch it.
My islam is talking politicks with fragile Anarchists
A private bill, amending the Marriage Act to include same-sex couples, has been introduced to federal parliament by Labor MP Stephen Jones.
I also have three keys that are keycards to slide through a reading mechanism. Two keys are circuits. I have tried each of them in turn, when I find locks that seem compatible. So far though, none of them have unlocked anything. I remain here in the hallway, searching for a way out, or a way in. I’m never really sure which it is. Still, I move on. The hallway itself is the only thing left to me, that and the doors, the locks and the seventeen keys.
Thank everyone who has reached out to me this past week, its means so much to me to know you are all lifting us up in your prayers or in loving thoughts. We will take all we can get during this rough time.
Edward James Day, 45, New York, N.Y.
Before the kids are home for the summer, I like to get their school scrapbooks all caught up for the year. This past school year my daughter served on student government. It was hard at times, but overall was a great and rewarding experience for my daughter. I created this page to jot down a few sentiments about how proud my husband and I were of my daughter for doing her best and being such a dependable young lady.
In conditions of mixed light our camera may have many problems in balancing the white, in this case it comes in help the 18% neutral gray thin cardboard that is used to calculate the exposure. Some photographers to balance the white use a gray card that is 5% neutral, that is a compromise between the total white and the darker grays... READ MORE
Today I was buying some drawing implements in a school stationary shop, and I saw they had some wonderful Casan marta brushes from Germany. And they had some that looked very very little. So I asked the seller, and I was proven right. They had, strangely enough, a few of the smallest in the range. I say its strange because I don´t actually live in the city, so it was nice to get this brushes without traveling more than an hour in the bus. And I was considering making the trip this next month. Perfect timing.
‘dad?’
Thus this year the Christmas decorations in my home are much more austere than I am used to. Still, the ornate details here and there create an atmosphere of familiarity and celebrate this delightful season in the spirit of love, family and companionship - the very essence of Christmas.
On May 10th, The Water Alliance, Clean Water Action, The Orleans Water Alliance, the Dennis Comprehensive Wastewater Management Task Force and other local committees are sponsoring a daylong workshop to explore models of governance to advance sustainable and affordable solutions to wastewater problems on Cape Cod.
When going to Rome, except from eating excellent food there is an obligation to visit the ruins and nonetheless St Peterus Square. The Vatican museum is where you go if you are really interested in art (or not), but it is an experience like no other if I may say so. In the museum you can find maps on how the Romans believed the world looked like, which is awfully well done except when it came to the north. Scandinavia is like a blurry island, which showed how far they travelled. They new that there was something in the north, but the investigation was probably not existing. This is basically the only way you can stand in the Sistine Chapel and have a glance of the work of Michelangelo which is breathtaking really. Not breathtaking like the most beautiful thing you have ever seen, but in ‘I can’t believe that he did all of this’ kind of way. When going to see this you believe that the classic The Creation of Adam is going to be bigger than it really is, which hit me when I saw it. But of course if you don’t want to have a humongous cuddle party in a air conditioned room with people you don’t know then you can watch the Sistine Chapel here http://www.vatican.va/various/cappelle/sistina_vr/index.html.
One lady burnt, one lady stoned,
When John Bremond, Sr. died his lot was divided up between Lillie Bremond Steiner, Louise Bremond Haynie, Virginia Bremond Nagle, and John, Jr.
And we were so blown away by it that we went into spiritual and emotional overdrive, and in our haste, we got a little lost. But not too badly. Did someone just say something about 'Rock' and 'Salvation'?
Before my heart attack, I used to drop a quarter in the Styrofoam cup held before me by one asking for alms as I turn the street corner. I used to hand out a dollar to a man or a woman by the stoplight holding a cardboard sign “anything helps.”
Or so I think. What say you all, dear readers?
This is where I don't know what happens for sure.I assume if I've had a good response from the Clomid and have at least one good size follie on the left I go home wait for the nurse to call with lab results and we decide if I should take the hcg trigger shot and when. This shot will force my ovaries to drop all the mature eggs. And then the next day we go in for the actual IUI.
The statement added that any profits accruing to the 51 percent stakes “should be regarded as property of the state”, and that other companies transacting with mining firms should remember that they are dealing with the government.
The woman, 25, told police Terrell swore at her and said, "I'll throw you off the balcony and say you jumped," according to court records.
That changes your entire perception of the character. Now you know why she was so rude to her boyfriend. Now you understand why she'd rather get fired than take shit from her manager. But if you disengaged and stopped reading because you didn't like her, you'd just think that Morgan is an angry drama llama who's mad at life for no apparent reason.
However, Mike Lanza wanted more for his children. He realized the value of unstructured play in his own life and in children's development. Children need to engage in unstructured play to develop leadership skills, learn to negotiate with others, and experience physical and emotional freedom. So he took action. He figured out how to carve out the play space needed for his family and neighborhood. And in Playborhood:Turn Your Neighborhood Into a Place for Play, Mike Lanza tells what he did, and how he did it. In addition, he offers a range of case studies from different settings--urban, rural, and suburban. Step by step, in his very readable style, he gives the information and inspiration parents need to create safe play spaces in their neighborhoods.
I hate hate. I hate the hating haters who don't hate hate like me. Kill the hating haters! Sterilize the hating haters, then kill them and desecrate their graves and dig them up and hate them for hating like that.
Brown sweater, Express. Turquoise/green/brown dress, Forever 21. Brown tank (beneath dress), Forever 21. Dark jeans, Express. Brown booties, Style & Co. Necklace of stone and silver, Bellis Fair mall. Brown headband, Claire's Boutique.
After my marriage in Bangalore we headed off to Hyderabad. Mum and Dad lived there and it is customary for newly weds to visit the bridegroom’s parents soon after the wedding. We spent five days in Hyderabad jam-packed with activities, another reception followed by visits to close family and friends.
And some more home decorating.
History also says the French were drunk at the time. Excuses, excuses!
Perhaps my dream's a prophecy, of Christmas to be,
The words “It is interesting to note that” are to all intents and purposes banned from JIPLP since they generally add nothing but length. If the text which follows those words is interesting, they are redundant; if it is not interesting, it shouldn’t be there in the first place. And if your reader is reading what you’ve written, he’s going to note it whether you tell him that it is interesting to do so or not.
til you try! It’s never too late to try something new. A talent is
This week, The Voice was all about Team Cee Lo.
~Anthony Euwer
“Stephanie’s dedication to our mission, vision, and values has earned her this recognition,” said Dan DeGroot, Community Memorial Hospital CEO.
One of each, please! Some in multiple colors too. Thanks. =)
If you find that you get shiny throughout the day don't apply more layers of this product as it will build up, leaving you looking plastered, rather apply an anti-shine oil absorbing powder where needed.
We will miss you Gramps! You are now home in Heaven with Grandma. Tell both Grandma and Mom hi for me!
Representative Alcee Hastings (D-FL) recently introduced an important bill that would prohibit oil companies from writing off the cost of oil spill cleanup. Under current laws, oil companies can pass much of their cleanup costs to the American Treasury, which impacts taxpayers. BP and any other oil company that operates recklessly should assume full responsibility for their actions.
It airs Sundays at 8 PM on the Discovery Chanel and is a seven-part documentary. Better get going because it’s starting soon.
October 17, 2010
When I was nineteen I felt my first lump. I was so scared. I made an appointment with my doctor immediately. My doctor assured me that it was a fibroid and nothing to worry about. I started doing my self breast exams and always wondered how I would know the difference. I would ask doctors and they would tell me that I would know. When I was about twenty-five I was told that my paternal grandmother had died of breast cancer. Some would say I became OCD about my breast exams. When I was thirty I had my first mammogram and when I was thirty-five I felt a lump that did not feel right and went to have it checked out only to be shrugged off and told that it was just a fibroid. So feeling like I was just being paranoid I kept up my self exams and did not pursue my concerns about that lump. But soon after my fortieth birthday while in the shower I felt a lump that just did not feel like it should and felt as large as a walnut. I was having some other female issues and decided to make an appointment with my family practitioner. When I saw him he said I really needed to see my gynecologist. I made an appointment and this time I made it with someone I knew would listen to my concerns and not make me feel like I was being paranoid. I talked to him and he suggested we do another mammogram and he felt that I had another fibroid but we needed to check it out. He told me that I needed to point it out to the technician when they did the mammogram. The test was scheduled for six weeks later. During the rest of the exam he discovered a large tumor in my pelvic wall and that began a long list of test and biopsies. All the test came back inconclusive. The only thing that was definite was that it was between 15 an 18 cm in length and 8 cm in diameter. My doctor and all his colleagues he consulted with had never seen anything like it. I was sent to a specialist out-of-town. I was scheduled to have surgery to have it removed. A week before I was to go into the hospital for surgery I went into have my mammogram.
Much plotting ensued and a cunning plan was decided on !
When basketballer Ron Artest decided to change his name to Metta World Peace – for no discernible reason other than simply because he wanted to – it was met with a collective roll of the Internet’s eyes.
I had only been quilting for about 6 months when I made this queen-sized quilt with a wool batting and backed in absolutely scrumptious (but also quite heavy) Little Folks flannel, and there were some headaches caused by the extensive free-motion quilting (I had thread breakage issues and had to unpick about 2 square feet of quilting, re-do with a different thread...but it all worked out). I wanted the FMQ to feel a bit Klimt-esque. Anyway, I felt an amazing sense of accomplishment when it was done, but as usual it took me a while to see it with a fresh perspective -- and now I really love it.
the next day, in a fit of lunacy, i went to the tire store in town and got 38 large tires. i cut 34 of them on site as well (i can only fit 18 not-cut tires in the back at a time). i had to take the sidewalls with me ( the recyclers on contract with the tire store will only pick up complete tires) but no matter, there are many uses for sidewalls... but that's a later post ;-)
“They say they are anti-racist. What they are is anti-white.”
-You are so mischievous!
Subway. McDonalds. Starbucks. Pizza Hut. Burger King. Dunkin’ Donuts. Wendy’s. Taco Bell. KFC. Domino’s Pizza.
2. Prayer – Praying in the Holy Spirit
In an interview with Weston published at Gates of Vienna, his nerves get the better of him. He wants to oppose what he continually calls "political correctness" -- itself a wimpy term for anti-white discrimination and population replacement -- but still be respectable: impossible in present-day Britain.
This wasn’t a happy book, and it wasn’t easy to read. However, I liked it very much. There are many things a person can do to hurt their partner, and infidelity tops them all. But the fact that cheating is bad doesn’t mean that every infidelity is the same. So here we have a guy who was deeply confused, worried and at a crossroads. He left the navy and didn’t know how to be a civilian, didn’t even know if being a civilian was what he really wanted, his wife wasn’t there to help him and he also had the great responsibility of being a dad. And one day he made a mistake. Was he a bad guy? No. There’s no redemption from him, but what about forgiveness? That’s what Penny must figure out.
I also love how she takes old, thrifted or hand me down furniture and slaps a coat of paint on it to make it into something new and stylish.
A river flows curbside
Kinks-type riffs, thunder drums, fast changes – Vasquez delivered the whole raw, gutter-cocktail with his earlier bands the Nights and Days and Night Kings, all the frantic yet melodic boom, bap, boom that fans of The Stooges and MC5 want in their music. The terrible essence of these bands can be summarized with one of the most tired lines in music: how can someone who writes such amazing songs remain so tragically underappreciated? Even in Vasquez’s native Pacific Northwest, and in our era of file-sharing and music blogs, it’s shocking how few people know the guy’s name.
92. “Age is whatever you think it is. You are as old as you think you are.” – Muhammad Ali
Hauck-Lawson, who teaches food and nutrition, developed this concept of a “food voice” while writing her dissertation on the roles and meanings of food in Polish American families in New York — a topic that grew out of her own upbringing.
Once the flower is complete, I used Glossy Accents as another adhesive. Place the nozzle down in the center and give a little squeeze, and maybe a few small squirts inside any of the other loose petals. It doesn't take long to dry, and once they are all finished they will be nice and stable.
What, Kelly? Did you have a bean burrito for lunch?
“Is not!”
Stop your racist view points for this is 2012 not 1969, Tun. You have seemingly deep frozen your philosphies with your Malay Dilema, really. The same type of Malays, Chinese, Indians, Sabahans and Sarawakians that still float within BN are also the members within the opposition coalition.
My personal opinion is that the Panthers are spending a lot of time seeing if one of these is worth a top ten selection. The organization have never been ones to spend high draft picks on receivers, so taking one would be a sea-change. They would need to be fairly certain they were getting an elite talent to invest that heavily in a receiver. Furthermore, I think this could point to the team not looking at a mid-round WR unless he has KR/PR skills. This makes sense because it’s unlikely they would find upgrades over LaFell and Gettis from the 3rd round on.
As we roll into the second week of being back in work the intensity will bump up just a little bit since nothing really taxed her last week. We won't do anything particularly demanding this week either, just moderately push the workload up to see how she responds.
It’s that time of year again – the annual Paisley Beer Festival opened last night. It’s the biggest beer festival in Scotland and only ten minutes from Glasgow on the train.
The activities of Abu Hamza go even further back than that.
Eventually, if I practice, and if I refine and hone my skills, I will create something sublime. I may even begin to draw you in to hear what I have to say.
In his new book Cities Under Siege, published just two weeks ago, geographer Stephen Graham explores "the extension of military ideas of tracking, identification and targeting into the quotidian spaces and circulations of everyday life," including "dramatic attempts to translate long-standing military dreams of high-tech omniscience and rationality into the governance of urban civil society." This is just part of a "deepening crossover between urbanism and militarism," one that will only become more pronounced, Graham fears, over time.
Although this is a sponsored post all opinions are my own.
“I didn’t lie.”
Grace to you and peace from God our Father
My regular order: a BLT with egg and cheese without the bacon, and a small royal milk tea
This image may seem simple at first, but the shot-from-below angle adds a great deal of drama and intensity, as it should, as this was a huge re-launch for the JLA. Up to this point, the book had meandered for more than a decade, featuring whatever haphazard cast of characters were free at the moment. Agent Liberty? Why not! Ice Maiden? C’mon over! That girl that was on that team in the eighties? Remember her? What the heck! This was a new beginning. Superman. Wonder Woman. Batman. Green Lantern. Aquaman. The Flash. Martian Manhunter. No more. No less. THIS is what the League should be. (Too bad creators forget that all too often.) You’ll have to forgive Superman’s long, 90s, grunge hair which looks less mullet-y here than it did at other times.
Vicky Verky
Well, at you can see from the above, Shareology was at the latest Social Media Breakfast in Bloomington, Minnesota; let’s take a look at the visual record:
Some people say that when it comes to pushing it is a relief, obviously these people are fucking liars, because it hurts so fucking much that I find it necessary to describe the degree of pain associated with pushing out a baby with no pain medication by using the word fuck. It fucking hurts.
I felt a bit overwhelmed yesterday when I was trying to find an outfit for today. I wanted something comfortable because I thought I was going to be running errands, light because the weather is abnormally hot for this time of year, and something that worked for my 9-5 and a dinner out. Apparently I get stuck when all of these things come in to play. To then take a photo of what I'm wearing and blog about it makes all of the decision making harder. So in the end I tossed all of my options and went with jeans. To be honest, I almost broke out my puma sneakers. You know it's a shitty day when I'm wearing sneakers (or a day that my leg is bothering me).
6,000 for a total of 12,000. Not 1.2 Million, or 1,200,000. But
He also said he dined each day as would a king. He basically said he had no problem except for hearing the screams of his abductor’s victims. He said he was living the good life there if not for the screams of those being tortured and killed before him.
Admittedly, this snippet of dialogue doesn’t give the reader much to go on. It does, I think, represent the larger book on a couple of levels. But first, here’s the context. The book’s protagonist, Bureau of Land Management (BLM) Law Enforcement Ranger J. D. Books, has been drawn into a joint investigation with the local sheriff’s department. The case involves the mysterious disappearance of a prominent southern Utah couple, who, for decades, have been involved in looting Native American ceremonial and burial sites in search of ancient artifacts. When they fail to return from a weekend “skeleton picnic,” the hunt is on.
Now, I am by no means a fashion expert. There are days where I feel like I’m on point and look pretty damn good and other days…not so much. So, I really have no idea what I’m talking about here; I just know what my eyes find offensive.
My favourite part of this invitation is the wording: “Whatever our souls are made of, his and mine are the same”.
1 red
Despite some good news about the economy in recent weeks, the Daily News reported on Thursday that the number of New Yorkers losing their homes spiked in January, with Brooklynites "bearing much of the pain." Of 1,825 homeowners who received some form of eviction notice in January, 693 (or 38%) were residents of the borough of Kings. As has been typical of the housing crisis in New York and other major cities, some of the hardest-hit neighborhoods were low to middle-income communities, including Bed-Stuy, East Flatbush, and East New York. While the city as a whole lags behind the national average (one in 409 homeowners faces foreclosure in the USA), these communities, like their counterparts in Queens, have seen the gains of the recent past rolled back in a hurry as jobs, credit, and home security disappear in lockstep.
Would like to thank my two new followers
He questions why is there an idea that men must go in one direction of the store and woman must go in the other? There are no rules in fashion, so why are there these society rules?
Then...I had a baby...and didn't get a chance to do the giveaway.
The next time Girl Crazy came to the screen, it would have the color (Metro-, not Techni-) that this version lacked, but that's about all. Still, considering the chaotic and uncertain atmosphere abroad in Hollywood at the time, it's remarkable that the third outing didn't turn out even worse than it did.
The land her freedom shall regain,
To augment the top part, I needed a wedge-shaped piece that would be wider toward the right. It would be tall enough that I needed some complexity at the right, so I sewed a slice from a strip set to another strip set and put it in place.
Well, then, the law ought to be changed. It says so much about the arrogance of the state Legislature that it could get away with rewriting New York's Freedom of Information Law so that it was largely exempt from it.
recently
Tools: deco scissors, glue dots, dimensionals
Mark has been away, and I refuse to listen to his replacements, the irritating and irritatingly named Floyd and Boyd, one of whom, and who fucking cares which one, started life as the film critic for Heat magazine. And so it is that I have not heard a review of 'Rise of the Planet of the Apes'. Which would be of little note had Common Law not brought home a doovd containing said movie burnt by one of her many admirers in work. And so, needing a little sabbatical from The West Wing and lacking My Double Blind Kermodian Buffer, I sat to down to watch it.
Feel free to email us @ RepresentersOfChrist@gmail.com
I would love to learn how to bake from scratch & know everything that’s going into my body; not so I can control it, but so I can revel in the joy of knowing that what I eat is doing my body this amazing nutritional service. I remember something a teacher said to me in year 4; learning about acute angles & right angles. “There are no right angles in nature, that’s something man has manufactured.” In nature, things aren’t sharp & cut & dry. In nature, it’s ok if things aren’t perfect. It’s the world that we’ve made that makes things sharp & perfect. I’d rather nature.
For many years people have always thought that the ancient ruins in southern Africa were mere cattle kraals built by local tribes. Professor Thomas Huffman from the Witwatersrand University, apparently conceived this idea in the 1970s. Recently Professor Tim Maggs, an archaeologist, confirmed this viewpoint. It turns out however that neither of these men knew anything about cattle, and nor did they bother to examine all the ruins thoroughly, -- because Dr. Cyril Hromnik, an American currently employed by the University of Cape Town, pointed out that some circular ruins (supposed cattle kraals) had no entrance, and that certain entrances were way too narrow for the thinnest and most lean cattle to fit through. Hromnik concluded that the ruins must have been temples, and based his conclusions on the fact that the stone structures were, in certain places, built according to astronomical solar alignments.
CW: 168.
Dang nabbit...
1) I love peas. Well, all vegetables really, but mostly peas.
...what?
It is sent. That is a relief. I do have this little piece to write for Monday, but it's not a proper review, just minor thoughts in the form of an essay, so I think it should be easier and more enjoyable than usual to write (hope those are not famous last words). I am weary!
Anyway, the next day after I'd started reading Eragon I got online and checked my email and, low and behold, there was an email announcing the release of the fourth novel (pictured above) titled 'Inheritance'. It will be released November 8, 2011! I'm excited to read it already! It should be an awesome conclusion!
But if anyone else comes asking, I’ll be charging a 5-figure sum and reserve the right to disappear for a couple of hours for an afternoon nap...
I was on fire, lit like Christmas as we agreed on a time. I then went to finish my newest horse idea, which slowly evolved into a licking, chewing, oh my God, it worked out perfectly. He was now responding like I was a competent leader, his drama attempt not moving me in the least, till finally he completely lowered his head and sighed. Pleased with all of this ask and receiving, I quickly came back in, made her the present of my magical meditation of Susie Mantell. Which as it clicked off done, and the tray popped open, she texted she was just up the street.
I wonder if I can say enough about his film? I guess we'll find out, won't we?
I’ve done a lot of thinking this past six months of not writing and now that it’s over I feel the words falling out of the air, dropping like bombs – a big one landed today and has changed my plans for tomorrow night. I’m alive after all. But, now I’m wondering what my Harry Dresden would look like.
(thanks To Mick Cannon for use of his facebook image)
As always, feel free to share information from this blog with others. Pass it along, reprint it in your newsletters…all I ask is that you give me credit and include a link to the blog. Thanks! Cindi
Attitude is everything
As I grieved the caretaker came and began digging a new grave. What was left to bury I asked? With tears in his eyes he quietly said. This one is for Hope. With out Love at her side she will no doubt die.
We would love to see you take on the sketch so please link up. We love looking at all the different ways you interpret the sketch.
Remove cheesecake from the oven and let cool completely on a wire rack.
Gives somewhere back the thoughts by England given;
In November 2009, a planning application was submitted for a geometric three storey end terrace, designed to complement the streetscape without emulating neighbouring houses. This was achieved by matching the red brickwork of surrounding properties and choosing a dark stain for the Siberian larch cladding.
The other panelists at the forum were Gerakan Kedah Youth chief Tan Keng Liang, Aliran secretary Mustafa K Anuar and journalist Himanshu Bhatt.
I’ve been trying to avoid the Internet–especially Twitter–since I read about Annie Clark winning an award for her penmanship. I posted the story on Facebook with a comment lamenting that her award was in a special category for people with disabilities. My mind was buzzing with snarky thoughts I was itching to tweet.
Knowing the truth would have value in itself. If we could reach a common understanding of the conflict of the past, it would also help lay the foundation for racial and political reconciliation. The goals the Truth and Reconciliation Commission (TRC) was mandated to attain were important.
I want to thank each and every one of your for coming to my blog, leaving me comments and supporting me these past few years. My 4 year blogiversary is coming up in a few days. I started my blog on Jan 3rd, 2008. Never in my wildest dreams did I think I would still be doing this 4 years later. It has been an incredible experience. That being said...this is going to be my last blog post for a while. Life has just gotten too busy for me to keep up with posting each week. As my dedicated followers have noticed, in the first few years I posted almost daily. Within the past year, I'm down to once a week and even then I miss a few. I'm not deleting my blog by all means so you may see a post from me now and then but it definitely won't be on a regular basis. Thank you so much for all of the love and support you have all shown me! I wish you all a safe and happy 2012!
and choose first one winner and then press vote.
folding your napkin & placing it on your chair as you
Final Fantasy V 2
A: That s not at issue here. The specificat ion doesn t indicate breadth. That s the purpose
Venus’s astronomical cycles are legendary.
Bookwork is calling..........
Pearl sitting in her temporary home away from home puts her at almost 6 inches. If you have been visiting then you know all about her glass base. If this is your first time just wander back a bit and you can read all about it. Keep wandering around and you will find all kinds of whimsical characters that live here under the old Southern Ooaks tree.
"There is no doubt in my mind that the four men - who each had R1 000 on them when they were arrested - were paid to kill me."
Talia Christine
Some thoughts on the tenth episode:
The concert also included some special guests, with Gabe Dixon on the keyboard (a seriously talented and spectacular pianist and singer), Matt Wertz, Ben Rector, Jason Eskridge, and Mallary Hope. It made for a hilarious and delightful night of entertainment. Way to go, Dave. Unfortunately, I don’t have any photos of the actual concert because it was against the rules. And I am a rule follower. Sorry.
Not at once, and in their time, not in Barley's. But she would come, he had no doubt. Maybe this year, maybe next, he said. But something inside the mountainous bureaucratic Russian belly would heave and give birth to a mouse of compassion. He had no doubt of it. It would be gradual but it would happen. They had promised him.
Please drink and redeem your digital drink tickets responsibly. Tip your bartenders generously.
This audio is ripped from a videotape which was supposedly given to a New York TV station by Alec John Such (former Bon Jovi bass player), and is from his personal collection of Bon Jovi items.
12:35pm. Forward movement stopped. I woke to more explosions and gun clicks, dried saliva on my lip. A drawn-out ‘what the f————–?’ automatically rattled my waking mind. The bus was on the shoulder, paralyzed, motored-down. Mechanical problems I assumed, but then I saw from my window’s sharp angle a line of trucks, cars, buses, and people waiting on the roadside. It was a roadblock, a protest, or some hybrid of both. There are two ways to deal with these all-too-common situations in South America. You learn patience or you go crazy. The Bolivians were silent with their patience, fully-absorbed in the movie. I respected their sanity, no matter how numb and dumbed down by the action-romance blood film. Having barely returned from insanity’s edge during my first ten or so roadblocks in Latin America, I too had learned patience. I slept. The group of French, German, Canadian, and American travelers several rows back strained their necks out the window for up-to-the-minute updates while incessantly asking about our future hypothetical forward movement. I rewound my Radiolab podcast to the exact spot where I had dozed earlier, and closed my eyes. “…The real lesson here…is if you don’t see past yourself you fall prey to, you know, superstition or magical thinking. You have to be careful not to find meaning here, when its just coincidence.”
Decker observed, "I don't think changing the massing is going to disguise the massing of the project. I'm interested in what you were talking about, about being a do-gooder leftist, and how you square that with the superblock, with the towers, the shrouded park...?"
improvements have been completed.
Our senses are turned outward and we engage fully with our environment by feeling the movement of air on our skin, the warmth of the sun and the texture of the grass or the sand underfoot.
The great thing about most of the Russian food I've ever cooked is that a lot of it is peasant food and is accordingly inexpensive to source and thus of interest due to its potential for good GP%.
Canterbury Jack - (Pale ale) 4.0% ABV
As a member of the press!!
So, in spite of all sorts of “stuff” going on around him, Paul wrote in Philippians 4:13,
Following the outbreak of World War II, Lamarr, a passionate opponent of the Nazis, wanted to contribute more to the allied effort. As Mrs. Fritz Mandl, she had closely observed the planning and discussions that went into attempting to design remote-controlled torpedoes. These never went into production, because the radio-controlled guidance system was too susceptible to disruption. She got the idea of distributing the torpedo guidance signal over several frequencies, thus protecting it from enemy jamming. The only weak point was how to employ the synchronization of the signal’s transmitter and receiver.
On the edge of green.
Note: Add 1 teaspoon of vegetable glycerin to the mixture and store in a sealed glass jar, to keep the product moist. Otherwise just make as much as you need at a time.
I can't show you anything on the "other" (main) version of this quilt, but "my" version... here you go. I have to say, it really sucks looking at super-up-close pictures of your own quilting in contrasting threads! All of these pictures are of the back of the quilt, and super cropped so that you can't see the actual design of the quilt. Wait a couple of weeks and you'll see it all.
God wants to give you the strength to rise above them and refuse to allow your circumstances and environment to determine the level of the life you live. He wants to be your strength and source. He wants to give you the ability to be stable and steadfast in good times and in bad!
2. Secondly, it is from what TRUTH is in the Pure Matter.
10 - Unseen Terror
the Jesuit faculty.
3. You won't end up on the waiting list because Blogalicious 2010 WILL.sell.out. We've doubled attendance this year but passes are going fast.
3. Taking Care of Myself
Mission: RAK
Good Morning Everyone!!
9 SAME-SEX relationships are illegal in more than 70 countries. In nine - including Afghanistan, Iran and Saudi Arabia - the penalty is death.
3/4 tsp. citric acid dissolved in 1/2 c. purified water
It is a simple game board and cards, but has 6 great games and activities.
“Love ya!” I proclaim to my coworker who helped me reach an important deadline.
It is because these kinds of ignorant comments that I decided to make a post, because even with all the talk about it, few people actually understand what Asperger’s really is. If I can make just make one person see that I am not just some “shy” kid or make one person understand a little bit more about Aspergers then that will be good enough for me.
Mādhava is a name for Kṛṣṇa highlighting his honey-like sweetness. He sincerely participated in these emotional scenes, although categorically different from all the others – being the source of the purity of the river in which the others sought purification.
For the white layers, I didn't have any sweetened condensed milk on hand, so I ended up using a 12 oz. can of evaporated milk with 2/3 cup sugar whisked in. I think it ended up tasting the same, however after the gelatin hardened the consistency wasn't as firm as it should have been, which didn't surprise me since evaporated milk is much more watery than sweetened condensed milk.
Remember to link up your entries to be in for the chance at gift vouchers and Guest DT spots...
It could be an exquisite and tasteful alternative to lingerie on your wedding night and continue to be a gorgeous nightgown for your newlywed life ... I also think it could create an amazing look as a swimsuit cover-up on your honeymoon - paired with metallic sandals, chunky turquoise jewelry and hints of a bright bikini peeking through ... It also transforms magnificently as a dress for cocktails at sunset - just pop it over a dressy top and slip and use a skinny belt to cinch the waist and voila, you have a gorgeously-updated-vintage look!
He saw his new son Michael for half an hour in Crumpsall hospital, and then caught the next train back to Kirkham. But as he dodged through a well-worn hole in the camp hedge, he noticed that huge lorries full of men were leaving in convoy. When he got back to the mess, Dad found his mates busily stuffing meagre possessions into kitbags.
These breadsticks are wonderful for a tea-time snack, for breakfast and a light lunch. It is really tasty. I ate these plain with a cup of Earl Grey. When eaten freshly baked, the crust is crispy and the insides are soft and chewy.
Drop garlic through food chute with food processor on, and process until minced. Add cottage cheese; process 2 minutes or until smooth. Add cream cheese, 2 tablespoons Romano, basil, pepper, and egg; process until well-blended.
Aerial images showed possibly hundreds of houses and apartments with shattered glass windows, many of them with their roofs blown away.
Never give up!
If you are watching the world media, you probably think Indonesia is ablaze with corpses littering the streets. Hardly the case. The reason for the hype is twofold, I suspect. One is government greed and the other is the use of natural or man-made events to maintain a climate of fear.
“Have you…” Emma took a step back and tucked her hair behind her ear. She wouldn’t look at me. “Have you ever loved anyone…like that?”
know the look of things
Edward Steichen
So far, since arriving Saturday after a unusually stressful trip (Ben pulled aside by security at Amsterdam for questioning, super strong stomach churning winds approaching DC and even more extra security questions going through customs) we've done a lot :
It's a far out psychedelic space rock epic. The first two tracks are really great jams not unlike those of Brainticket or Can, with longing vocals that don't make much sense and all kinds of heavy loose grooves gliding along. The second side is mostly a more mellow track, with spacey drawn-out guitar sketches and ending with a build of drums and bass. It's a really nice example of the more spaced-out side of progressive rock, created with as much energy as anything. - Matthew Foster
I suppose we have long has special status here in the UK, fortunate enough to chuck whatever we wanted away into seemingly endless holes in the ground, rarely recycling and rarely setting fire to it. The terrible environmental impact of this laissez-faire attitude has put all of this to an end, we need to find new solutions and as we do so, our very British attitude to waste rises it's nimbyish head.
As for me, I am back to losing weight and getting healthy. I am already 13 lbs below my pregnancy weight. I had found that since having the baby some of my stomach troubles have resurfaced and I have had to return to a vegetarian diet. I feel so much better and have so much more energy since doing that! I am contented with my rural life and with the fact that this was my last baby. I am loving my life, my family, and my house (although I will love the house more, once I finish getting it all organized!).
Clearly, the app isn’t working properly. Everyone knows that cake and snacks and other people’s left-over mashed potato don’t count. Nor do cold sausages that you find in the fridge. And wine definitely doesn’t have any calories.
But do we? Really?
I am SOOOO looking forward to cooking foods for Cadet. And I have already thumbed through several different cookbooks and gotten a few ideas. Since our area is a cornucopia of fresh fruits and veggies, I can’t wait to let loose with him at the Farmer’s Market. I am really looking forward to when we can take him out to our favorite Indian or Thai restaurant and letting him experience those spices and flavors for the first time. I feel that part of exposing Cadet to the wonders of this world will happen when he first tastes a light curry or miso soup or even just a fresh peach still warm from the sun.
No Cameras from the shadows offstage
In those bittersweet moments, it hit me how much alike the two of us were. Her baptism story is much like my youth group calling story.
A little too adorable – it was teensy tiny. That’s the thing with Craigslist though – no returns.
Congratulations. You may grab your top three badge from the sidebar.
If you do all these things there is still no guarantee that you will be published, no one has the right to expect a publisher to put out money to publish and promote a book unless they believe it will sell enough to make more than it cost them - that is only common sense!
After the movie, Jewell and I headed over to Quincy’s (it’s a bar inside the hotel) for An Evening with Roddy Piper which was billed as a stand up act, but was really more like a stream-of-consciousness recitation of his early years in wrestling. Think of An Evening with Kevin Smith, but less scripted and well-rehearsed. You can’t fit all that on a poster so stand up act it is. I’m not a fan of wrestling, but when I was a kid, I did watch the show every once in a while. Plus, They Live is one of my favourite John Carpenter flicks.
SH: What if we have to ship something?
It claimed that using the image ‘is a big issue because this packaging will potentially land in both Northern Ireland and Scotland stores’. That is despite both being represented in the flag, playing a key role in the jubilee celebrations and being part of team GB at London 2012.
It was then that she realized her family could not see her.
When you arrive in South Tyrol and see all these fruit fields, small villages you feel comfortably being in a natural habitat. To that point nothing can destroy your inner warmth that you experience – pure nature. In addition to that, because most tourists have been there for several times, it feels like coming home. Plus most of you are travelling with friends and family. So South Tyrol is covering the 3 most desired influences that gives each one of us joy and happiness – nature, home, family/friends.
2That thou mightest fear the LORD thy God, to keep all his statutes and his commandments, which I command thee, thou, and thy son, and thy son’s son, all the days of thy life; and that thy days may be prolonged.
Apart from the horrible carry on, we experienced our first real yum-cha today. The bride ordered for the table, in Chinese, so we had no clue what was coming. Being a fussy eater I was a little nervous, but it was fabulous. Yeah I probably ate the boring stuff, but it was tasty. Adam even tried a chicken foot, he didn't finish it, and confirmed that he will never try one again.
Yesterday’s initial Q1 report confirmed that government spending cuts were a big drag (though at least the private sector is picking up the baton).
In recognition of the heavy responsibility of police and military personnel and the challenges they face in the line of duty, Abdullah said they would get an additional 20 per cent on top of the increase.
Option (E) is, of course, the best answer. The others are nothing but rhetoric. The problem with rhetoric is “that’s all it is”. Rhetoric differs mightily from performance. And rhetoric is not a substitute for performance.
Tom: oh jeez...
Light was radiant over all: words ceased, for none were needed.
really say anything about sons so we didn’t push anything. They have
To be honest, I'm not much on fashion, but I still thought that was a fun touch.
The SAIRR said if the police were truly shocked, then it suggested that "the police’s senior management is out of touch with the reality of life on the ground for people in areas such as Gugulethu who have been left to run the gauntlet of violent crime on a horrific scale".
Lord, You know my heart
What do you think? Vote and let me know if you think a few of my shoes should come out of hiding!
The Innovative Educator is a blog created and maintained by author Lisa Neilsen. Lisa promotes ideas on her blog concerning passion-based learning and embracing technology in curricula of the 21st century. Lisa is a proponent of integrating technologies, such as cell phones, into the education process, rather than “blaming and banning” these devices. A recent post on Ms. Nielsen’s blog is entitled “Twitter for Administrators, Teachers and Students.”
Delores Wallace is a remarkable woman. She founded the Girls Incorporated Teen Prevention program in Wilmington, North Carolina, and poured her heart and soul into “her girls” for 15 years. She was called to this work while working in an OB/GYN office and a young girl who was wasting away from AIDS put her head on Delores’s shoulder and asked, “Ms. Delores, am I going to live?” That girl passed away, but Delores vowed to do whatever she could to prevent this tragedy from happening to another young girl. Her work with Girls Incorporated revolved around an after-school and weekend program to educate, empower and build the self-esteem of girls in adolescence. Under her guidance, the teen pregnancy rate in New Hanover county was cut in half over 5 years, and out of 250 at-risk girls in her program in a year, not one got pregnant.
These are just a few samples of the many amazing pieces of jewelry that she has made.
flip and cook for another 2 mins
Arizona Cardinals: C+
Interestingly, my mom thinks Valentine’s day is cheesy. So I thought she would like this dish. I cooked lunch on Valentines day to show that I love my family .
If you are a tele-worker or running a business, business broadband packages can give cutting edge over your competitors. It is not just the speed, but the less contended line and other key features like unlimited email addresses, domain name, web space and more secured connection can make a huge difference. You need not worry about per minute charges with broadband connection because you will pay fixed monthly charges. These monthly charges depend on the service that you have chosen. If you go online on regular basis and for long hours, broadband will become cheaper than dial-up which is charged for the time spent online. The broadband plan basically depends on how much you download data in a month. Unless you download large files like videos or software, a basic package with 2 GB or 5 GB is quite safe. You can also select unlimited broadband package, if you want to download too much data.
By 3 pm it looked hurricanish.
I found this necklace at a little open air market in Buenos Aires. I hope I get to go back there some day, especially now that I can call myself an Argentine tango dancer. But the main thing I want to go back there for is to make more unique wardrobe acquisitions!
Salon Corbeau. Ugh. The thought just makes me want to break something. It’s really awful. And knowing Locke’s background, it must be absolutely disgusting for him. The Amusement War is just cruel, and nothing else. Lynch really makes you feel it when that girl loses her hair. Horrid. Horrid, horrid, horrid.
My sewing machine is handicapped at the moment. The light has burnt out and it is an hour drive to get another one. It has severely limited the amount of quilting I can get done. Frustrating to say the least. I have been planning future projects instead. Almost as frustrating because I can not begin them until the projects I have on the go are completed.
RICHARD BARNBROOK AM
The other viable alternative is to use I&S dollars. I&S dollars can only be used for things like mechanical and building repairs, new construction, building renovation… However, I&S dollars cannot be used for normal expenditures like salaries, programs, utilities…
Nah, maybe it was the lack of any kind of public presence in the community and the fact that a majority of the clientele were just really crappy human beings. I mean the kind of people who would say things like they would pick their dog over their unborn child and that a good punch to the gut was all she needed to make him happy.
2. Leave a comment on this blog post telling us what area in your home most needs organized?
"For the first time, e-book authors can now publish for free and keep the entire sale price of their e-book. That means if an e-book is sold for $4.99 through the Booktango bookstore, the author gets the full $4.99," said Chris Bass, Director of Marketing for Booktango. "If it's sold through another outlet, the e-books retailer takes their standard fee, and the author gets the rest. Booktango takes nothing -- no other publishing company is offering anything this beneficial to authors."
We cool?
7. What is your favorite body part to strength train?
Barbara Jean Bell (Lib Dem) 226
The Emanation Pale Ale cuts the mustard as a mid strength (4.5%) session beer that is full of crisp, fruity hops, sweet maltiness and lingering dry bitterness that really was rather nice and very moreish. I would say that it's more a bitter than a pale ale but that doesn't really matter. It is still a lovely beer, whatever you call it.
The interface for answering surveys fits a few similar styles, some of them appear more modern than others. The style of the survey depends on who has posted it. After meeting an estimated time while taking the survey you will get “paid” in reward points upon completion. You always will get entered into a monthly raffle for every survey you complete. This monthly raffle gives you a chance to get 10000 reward points (10 people win this each month), or 50000 reward points (only one person wins this each month). There is also a $4000 sweepstakes that happens every 3 months, this has special rules that can be found at this link.
Though long retired – and quite elderly himself – the Army investigator spoke with a raw disgust about the events of a quarter century earlier. He requested anonymity before talking about the behavior of senior Americal officers.
We were sitting in the back seat of the car during a night drive, my two younger brothers and I, and I looked over at them right when some head lights hit my face just right. My brothers scooted closer to each other and shivered with fear as they saw my big dark eyes glaring at them. Unintentional scariness, of course. Once I figured out that without a word I could wield that kind of power, I found ways to use it to playfully (honestly) intimidate them. But after a while I came to learn that I was really just kind of scaring myself. There is a real "thing" about a first-born, whether it is the stereotypical charismatic leader, or someone who does it more subtly.
My nails were a result of boredom. I bought a multicolored 12 pack of loose glitter from Ross for $4 which is so cheap considering Michael's prices! After a base coat, I dipped my finger nails in the glitter, shook off the excess and added a top coat. I liked it, it looked pretty but it was messy and I won't do it again! I will find a lot of other uses for my glitter though. I will probably funnel some of it into clear polish...which is a lot less messy.
I looked in my closet and I may have only had one pair of sensible flat shoes that didn’t hurt my feet. So, I turned my shoe obsession to kitten heels and cute flats and wedges. In my latter 20′s I still wanted to be cute, but I still needed to be able to walk, handle business and not take off my shoes at the end of the day and be mistaken for a ballet dancer from the ankles down (ankles up, I’m all about it).
Whether you pass or fail is also irrelevant. The first door, through which most people exit, leads to an airport departure lounge where you are flown home, never to return. Why would you want to? The middle door leads to a long tunnel which eventually leads back into the largest of the three rooms where you will find a desk with your name on it and you will be paid to mark papers. You will not have learnt what a scrunglebob is, nor will you have seen anymore of the country. The third door, through which very few pass, leads to the hire care.
I am soooo ready for Spring!
Last week, I painted a tall tree in a little girl's bedroom, to match her new owl/flower themed bedding. I loved the bright colors in her bedding set (this "Owl Nature Bedding", from Target), and had fun replicating a fun look for her tree!
The clubs have until 4pm on Tuesday the 4th of April to appeal against the decision although it is thought neither side will do so with such evidence against the clubs.
Simple and Sweet. I have much more coming... I was just sorting through my pictures and I have 2 dressers, 2 tables, a buffet, a desk all just waiting to be shared. This blog has been so busy that I haven't wanted to overwhelm you with posts so they will have to wait. :)
Nonfiction is sold on the basis of a book proposal. I've written lots and lots about proposals; I won't get into it here except to say that even if your whole manuscript is complete, you STILL need to show a proposal first. It contains information that's not in a manuscript, such as your target audience, your marketing plans, an analysis of competing books, your qualifications, etc. Some agents will look at a book proposal unsolicited, but most prefer that you first submit a query letter the summarizes it first, then if they give you the go-ahead, you submit the proposal.
The obession grew worse by the day and now I'm taking pills for it. ;)
This is my favorite Barbra era. She was sexy, vivacious, and carefree. She infused boho chic with old-school glam. In a recent interview with Instyle magazine, Barbra said this was her favorite fashion period as well.
I thought I would find everything snapped up and reserved as usual. (Her stuff is awesome and goes quick) I was surprised to find she had a lot of Dream Sleeves up for grabs, I was even more surprised to find there was a Dryad Dream Coat in my size in colors I liked up for grabs. The name of the coat is Potions Class and the colors are all reds, oranges, and purples and I was instantly in love. I must have looked at it a million times in one minute. I quickly logged in to Etsy and after some frantic password resets I saw it was still for grabs. So I called in Husbandman and told him that the shop owner usually allowed for paying in installments could I do it? (Her coats are kinds pricey, but worth it) To my SURPRISE he told me to just pay for it outright!!
Here’s a snippet of a press release from Leaf, via PFT:
This tiny new basal break on ‘Leonie Lamesch’ didn’t get zapped, but a second look reveals that the deadly menace has chewed off the basal break that I was so excited about only a couple of days ago. I’m going to find a way to stop these tree-rats… if it kills me!
Before he stopped struggling, however, a heavy blow fell across my brow, sending me flying against the trunk of the tree that had concealed me. I maintained my senses enough to see what hit me. It was Zanashet, the Topa god of destiny. For a minute, I allowed myself to feel fortunate. Zanashet bestows destinies on the truly great. I’d been hoping he would pay me a visit. After swatting me aside like a mosquito, however, he paid me no mind.
One morning I headed to work just as the sky was beginning to lighten. A slight drizzle was presenting itself, but the road was wet from an earlier rain. On a downhill corner, I laid the bike down. The tires simply didn’t grab the road.
No duplicate comments. You may receive (2) total entries by selecting from the following entry methods: a) Leave a comment in response to the question above b) Tweet about this promotion and leave the URL to that tweet in a comment on this post c) Blog about this promotion and leave the URL to that post in a comment on this post d) For those with no Twitter or blog, read the official rules to learn about an alternate form of entry. This giveaway is open to US Residents age 18 or older. Winners will be selected via random draw, and will be notified by e-mail. You have 72 hours to get back to me, otherwise a new winner will be selected. The Official Rules are available here. This sweepstakes runs from 2/14/2012 -3/15/2012.
Moving on from the Stolichnaya tasting, Patsy created for us all 3 different cocktails involving the Stolichnaya products.
I thought when I was old enough I would understand more, thought the candles on my birthday cake would signify a wisdom denied to the young.
Also noteworthy in this photo:
Bad things-
On Wednesday night, on the Fox News Channel’s O’Reilly Factor, Bill O’Reilly took on the subject of media bias, focusing specifically on a recent report by Andrea Mitchell on MSNBC which showed that she was less than objective when it came to covering Republican presidential candidates Mitt Romney and Newt Gingrich.
He was then arrested.
I didn’t get my Wisconsin driver’s license with my first road test. I failed. I didn’t look upon the incident as failure. I just thought I must try again – and hopefully find an examiner who wasn’t so anal. I did and I passed, but I still drive too fast and a little reckless. That pretty much defines my life, and my writing is the same. My Pazuzu Trilogy is an example – hell, it’s my road test. Failure is unimaginable* – and self-publishing facilitates my “re-testing.” That is why there have been so many revisions of the trilogy – although, I had to take the road test for my driver’s license only twice.
I particularly liked Halo by Zizou Corder, an unusual story about an orphaned girl brought up by Centaurs in ancient Greece. I thought it full of unexpected events and plot developments and interesting characters. Sarra Manning's Nobody's Girl was a perhaps more usual teenage girl fare but I so loved the way the heroine got her revenge on the mean girls and their Queen Bee that it stood out for me.
This whole next part, I was the only Wadley present.
Sam squirmed, wishing he would look somewhere else or, even better, that he'd go away completely.
Many people remember our ANZACs on this special day by baking ANZAC biscuits. These biscuits were baked by the wives and mothers of the soldiers in World War I, and sent in food parcels to those fighting in the trenches. Made with oats, golden syrup and coconut, they are still an Aussie favourite today.
As always, her gut told her the exact moment to let go, and she released her grip. Over her pounding heart, she heard the arrow's familiar whistling sound. A silver streak in the bright afternoon sun - then, as if drawn by a magnet, the arrow struck the bullseye with a satisfying thunk.
Billy Bob: You mean that chick down by the lake last summer??
W9. 7. 5. 3. R22. 20. 00. E11. 00. 000.
She made this astonishing comment about the moving performance of this Filipino-Mexican breed of culture and geniality. Lopez commented,
4. Scrape the paste into a jar. Pour a film of oil over it if you plan to keep it for a while. Store in the refrigerator.
But the fact that I did all that by myself made me feel much more experienced – today I feel like I did something real, today is the day that I feel like a real journalist and not a student one.
The next blog will be either tonight to confirm that everyone has arrived safely, or possibly first thing tomorrow morning. I have the feeling the team will be anxious to get out and enjoy the city tonight!
Odd size logos, etc can be cut smaller and several can be used to create a design that is the size of the other shirts. It is like making a collage–combine the designs to make a pleasing picture. The usual size of the template may be: 12×12 inches, 10×10 inches, 16×16 inches, 14×14 inches, or 18×18 inches. These will vary with the logo sizes on the shirts. For a crib size shirt using baby clothes the template may be 3×4 or 3×5 inches using 12-15 toddler to infant size tshirts. A twin size using toddler and small child size shirts 40-54 shirts and a 5×8 or 6×9 template.
On the other side of that coin, he is all BOY. He likes burps and farts, getting dirty outside and riding his bike. He loves wrestling and watching baseball. Ben’s all time fave thing to do is play his X-Box. He has been playing this since he was old enough to sit on his father’s lap and watch. I’m not sure whether that’s a good thing or not, but he is mega great at games at this point. In fact, when he grows up he wants to either be a Major League baseball player OR a game tester! He likes playing rough so sometimes momma has to step aside and leave the rough handling to the big guy. (hubby) OR….sometimes he takes it out on his sister. See below:
The Nicola Watershed Community Round Table and the City of Merritt are jointly sponsoring & organizing a Water Festival to take place on June 8 at Rotary Park from 1 to 8pm.
Reproduction by budding occurs in thousands of species, and has gone on with few modifications for half a billion years. What makes the jellyfish Turritopsis nutricula so special is that once it reproduces, it doesn't die, but transforms itself back into its juvenile polyp state, resembling a stalk with tentacles like a tiny sea urchin. Their adult cells--even their eggs and sperm--melt into simpler forms of themselves, and the whole organism becomes "young" again. Barring any sea-borne dangers, there is no biological reason why it can't live forever.
8. Eat. This doesn't seem very important, but it takes up a large portion of my time, so I thought I'd mention it here.
Experimenting may at times involve burnt caramel and a non-rescuable frying pan, but other than this minor set back, I think I may have come up with something worthy.
If you choose to keep supporting the KONY 2012 campaign, good on you. As long as you have taken the other side of the story into consideration first. Thank you for reading.
Damnit, I already bought a new saucepan this month. But was it nickle-silver? Aurgh! If only I had known Hyomin would endorse nickle-silver! Now I have to eat off some substandard, non-Hyomin approved crap that’s, what–?
Today's Food Tips...
It is extremely heartening that by now few lightworkers are jolted by ominous-sounding information in Internet articles or messages from off-planet dark entities or dire reports in mainstream media. Yet, some lightworkers, like so many people who aren’t, dive headlong into fear until the newest prediction or claim is proven baseless. In previous messages we have specified scores of those kinds of deliberate disinformation or doomsday scenarios, so we won’t repeat those, but we shall assure you that all recent scary-sounding situations, such as heavier saber-rattling about Iran, potential radiation from an explosion in Japan and Al Qaida’s plans for terrorism, will come to naught.
The postie brought me a nice surprise this morning, a cheque for a tenner from The Kevins. I'd resigned my membership, and they were nice enough to agree to refund me part of my subscription. Thus ends 12 years.
And it's the glazing, and the glazes that have killed them. The dark blue plate had rounded edges on the break, so it broke in the re-heating, not through over vigorous cooling. More even glaze thickness would help, but again, some of the glazes don't seem to have matured, and definitely don't match the descriptions in the catalogue.
Moreover, these various terrorist organizations are now being used in US-NATO covert military operations against sovereign countries (e.g. Libya and Syria). According to Israeli intelligence sources:
“Magnesium is a very important mineral that many are lacking. Besides being so important in the metabolism and synthesis of nutrients within your cells, it also inhibits the absorption of fluoride into your cells! Along with magnesium, calcium seems to help attract the fluorides away from your bones and teeth, allowing your body to eliminate those toxins. So during any detox efforts with fluoride, it is essential that you include a healthy supplemental dose of absorbable calcium/magnesium as part of the protocol.”
What to do when class gets boring?
1 disruption
Must therefore be ready to
Dennis Maloney
5.) An incident at Girl Scout camp with outdoor latrines. I noticed an enormous log of scout (Bear?) turd at the bottom of the hole, which gave me an idea. I brought in the other leader’s daughter, Sherri, as my accomplice. While the leaders overcame hangovers, we lined up all the scouts and told them we had a “surprise” for them.
I love these ornaments and think they are so adorable! They are a great gift. You can personalize them for someone special, by using their favorite colors, favorite sports scrapbook paper, holidays, etc. The possibilities are endless! I hope you will try this out and let me know how it went.
I received this book for free from WaterBrook Multnomah Publishing Group for this review. I was not required to write a positive review. The opinions I have expressed are my own.
A feeling he nearly succumbed to until her head tilted slightly to the side and a rather pleasant imitation of a woman’s voice sounded from those cold lips. “You are the bounty hunter called T’ress, I presume?”
A confession: I know I gave short shrift to rap in my inventory of American music above. Rappers appear to like rum, although not as much as Hennessy. But, seriously, some rapper somewhere surely must be able to improve upon rhyming “Bacardi” and “party”:
16. Augustus 2009
in her voice, as she knelt gently down beside her father's chair......
worked hard to keep. What’s familiar here?
Beautiful Girls
Key Lime Pie.
Look at this bit from P Z Myers’ Pharyngula blog:
A worn and gray schooner where from I don’t know
That was a terrible decision.
Carter had a momentary lapse of judgement when he'd passed the Church of St. Paul the Apostle on his way up Columbus Avenue. He couldn't figure if it was just from exhaustion, or the fact that his memory was going, but he'd walked right in through the front doors, crossed himself at the font, knelt at the altar, and prayed. For hours. Well beyond sunset.
3. Tumblr contradicts itself when it says that they are “deeply committed to supporting and defending our users’ freedom of speech” while enforcing this policy.
I have some really fun things to show you this week! I've been a sewing diva lately. From sewing my own cute pajama bottoms, to refashioning projects. Stay tuned!
Warmest wishes for the new year and welcome to all, and an especially warm welcome to those of you who are new to this list. There's something in this newsletter for writers, anyone interested in Mexico, Iceland, undercover CIA agents (yeah!) and West Texas.
In the next couple weeks, I am hoping to refinish a couple furniture pieces around my home and post some pictures. I also have a few more ideas up my sleeve for projects I would like to tackle.
In the morning, as we packed our car to leave, a goodbye party formed. The families we'd come to know came outside or waved like mad from their balconies. Lucien ran back into the restaurant to tearfully tell his two "girlfriends" there was a hotel next to our apartment in Paris, so they could come to Paris and stay there. (He still talks about those two girls, and has cried himself to sleep several times about no longer being at the Kinderhotel).
“I think I shat my pants, Sid,” he was saying, as Sid pulled him from the car. He was talking funny. A closer inspection revealed part of his mouth was missing, right where his upper lip connected to his lower and Johnny's tongue kept sliding out of his face. ‘I shat myself, Sid,’ but it sounded more like ‘I thaat ma shelfth, Thid.’
Bass - Sirone
“Not unlike Hitler’s later nazification programs for German Youth, exemplified in the Hitlerjugend, the Young Turks now launched a program of nationalist indoctrination an paramilitary training for Turkish youth.” (The Burning Tigris, Pg 163).
The corners of the market square were delineated by the presence of four different, yet equally important stores. A bakery, newsagent, fruit shop, and delicatessen.
But now He was raised from among the dead. He stood in their midst and gave them commandment, “Ye shall be witnesses unto me, beginning at Jerusalem.” That very place in which He was betrayed, arrested, interrogated, mocked, scourged, humiliated, and finally crucified. Now they were going to be witnesses unto that rejected One. The word “witness” is from the Greek word martus from which we get our English word “martyr” and means one who bears witness by His death. Why did they kill John Huss? Because he was outspoken in his testimony of Jesus Christ and dared to stand against the commonly accepted views of the established church. You can trace Church History and find scores of martyrs, those who bore witness by their death. There was Polycarp, John Wyclif, William Tyndale and many others back in the early centuries and in later years. We can see how the word “martyr” relates to witnessing or testifying. We might say you can stake your life on it.
Oh ye, of little faith!
Summary: Destiny Faraday makes a point of keeping her distance from her classmates at Hedgebrook Academy. Her number-one rule: Don’t get attached. But one day, unexpectedly finding a car at their disposal, Destiny and three of her classmates embark on an unauthorized road trip.
Matthew 6:6 But thou, when thou prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father which seeth in secret shall reward thee openly.
THE CANDYLAND CARCRASH/SERAPHIM - "A Rockt Trip to the Moon" Split 7" (Black) Small Craft Advisory
Now Little Wellies has taken the combo of costume meets outfit- here she has created these adorbale outfits to resemble disney princesses...to just wear to town or a playdate. So many choices!! I think Belle is my favorite.
Due to the nature of opiates, i.e., the way in which opioid receptors bind to the brain’s receptors responsible for feelings of contentment and well-being, prolonged opiate use compromises the brain’s ability to produce endorphins organically. Thus, an integral component of opiate addiction is physical and neurological in nature; science has proven that an opiate addict’s brain reflects differently when scanned and compared to a non-opiate user’s brain
we’re meant to feel faceless,
Haven’t had enough yet? Well, you can catch Hottie the following night at Burlesque & Cabaret Behind The Pink Door
The "gift from the gods" proved to be a mixed blessing when the tribesmen tussled over it and eventually used it as a weapon. To keep the peace in the village, Xi was assigned to take the bottle to "the end of the earth" and throw it back to the gods… and that is when the actual story begins.
In 1976 Bobby died of a heart attack. The following year Jack Bradley - former Hackett manager and close friend - asked Gordon Brooks, the leader of The Clam Shack Serenaders, to play a cornet solo at Bobby's grave side, which he gladly did (he chose More Than You Know)....and since then Gordon has played a solo in the Chatham Cemetary every June 7th.
All hail the Branaugh.
4. Don’t drink mint juleps!
She whispers...
Things were going very well. We were both quite fond of one another. Conversation was light, entertaining and quite enjoyable. We shared many things in common and were very much ‘on the same page’ when it came to most subjects.
A few local teams made it to the high school state basketball championships in Des Moines, so we decided to make a weekend of it. We dropped Jared off at Grandma & Grandpa's house (because we didn't think he'd have much fun with us), and treated the older kids to a fun filled, hotel staying, donuts and ice cream eating, toys playing, movie watching weekend. We surprised the kids when we picked them up a bit early from school on Friday afternoon, and then headed off to the Friday night game. When we arrived at the hotel afterwards, we swam for a little while and then fell asleep watching cartoons on TV.
This is what creates the landscape of your next moment in time. This choice you made with complete action to put it into an energy motion (think e=MC2).
From now on it’s all plain sailing. Be confident, be creative. Trust yourself and trust your skills. Find someone to learn with and find pleasure in what you’re doing.
Florida Gulf Coast University is introducing a new program (2009) in the Whitaker Center for Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics on Sustainability in Education: Interdisciplinary studies to focus on water, energy and civic engagement , ethics, consumer communications, case studies to encourage lifelong learning and critical thinking … Partnering with Florida Solar Energy Center, University Central Florida for solar technology study and public problem solving … Four- semester course series: 1) World views and water .. 2) Energy /Shelter .. 3) Food/Agriculture … 4)Waste, Health, and Pathways to Sustainability. Lectures, small group meetings, field trips.
Seek this out, and then come back and tell me how you feel about it.
“Rachel” is a woman I have known for at least 10 years. I first met her at the store when our children were little. Every few years I bump into her on shopping trips. Well currently our sons are on the same soccer team, and we see each other every week. The Lord is letting me know that it is past time to witness to her.
Thursday early morning, she woke with a fever of 102.5 and that is when the worry set in...a few phone calls later, we were told to go to the ER where her surgery was done. We saw like 5 Drs from the Neuro Dept and she was again admitted( after waiting 9 hours in ER) We were worried about Meningitis.
The book has been described by Andrew Harvey as ‘A wonderfully clear and inspiring book…Its importance for our times cannot be exaggerated’; while Dan Millman has written that ‘Each page highlights the resilience of our human spirit.’
Oh, my dear, it’s rather hard to take quite literally the things a man says when he’s in love with you.’
High school. Good times…not. I actually miss high school, but that’s besides the point. Freshmen year was fun until it became a flop in the friendship department. But besides that, I can say with a lot of assurance that I’m not who I was in ninth grade. Tenth grade was good and bad all the same. I’m not who I was then. Eleventh grade…now that’s where this girl who got baptized starting coming to church. I can’t say that I was very happy about adding these obnoxious eighth grade into the mix because maybe, yes, I did find them obnoxious and annoying. Besides, I actually didn’t go to youth group that often during that year. I was having some issues. Glad to say I’m not who I was that year either…I’m actually doing something. Then senior year rolled around and I got to know this girl with some other girls and somewhere down the line maybe even before my senior year, we became friends.
concluded that expediency seems to dominate equity. Instead of taking into account a defendant's economic circumstances, as required by the state "Harris County rarely deviates from its predetermined bail schedules." Jailing people who have not yet been convicted of even a petty crime is unjust - and costly to taxpayers, the report said. "The rigidity of these rules contributes to high pre-trial detention rates in Harris County and exacerbates the County's budget woes."
Welcome to the revolution! That’s right, we are living through a revolution in the way we consume, produce, share, connect and find stuff. And by stuff I mean Levi’s Action slacks size 54×32, or maybe a John Piper book. How about the best video on education in the whole wide world! None of these things are related, but they are all super-accessible in less than 10 minutes of searching, which changes EVERYTHING.
1) Pre-heat oven to 200C.
But I am glad I did it!
AND now, there is a newly improved product on the market. It is the app Storia, which has been updated to be able to have access to the Scholastic ebook store! Here are the specifics from the App Store:
...and it was fun!!
1 part pineapple juice
Berryz Koubou x ℃-ute new digital release “Cho HAPPY SONG” Ayaka kicks off her tour at Nippon Budokan CNBLUE to release their “MTV Unplugged” on DVD ‘Code Geass: Akito the Exiled’ to Debut in Theatres in August Taetiseo’s ‘Twinkle’ ranks high on iTunes USA album charts After School introduces their new member at Zepp Tokyo concert AKB48′s Itano Tomomi Holds a Free Mini-Concert at Her Hometown 2NE1 ranked as the #2 artists to watch on Ireland’s ‘Juice’ program KARA’s Seungyeon reveals a depressing tweet? Jang Geun Suk Gets Into Car Accident
You write two distinctly different styles, both which I happen to love equally. Do you have to be in a particular mood to write either, or does your editor tell which mood you’re going to be in? J Do you prefer either style over the other?
As usual, Anne Lamott says it best:
late and soon,
Many pieces are Customizable - for the pendants, the customer gets to choose the Type of button they use as the focal point of the necklace (Available in Oak Wood, Apple Wood and Juniper Wood ) as well as a color for the large bead. (I chose Lavender and Juniper)
Address for posting:
156 8. Book Review: Howard Brotz, The Politics of South Africa: Democracy and Racial Diversity (New York, 1977). Chicago Sun-Times, Show/Book Week, August 14, 1977, p. 8 (abridged). Printed, in its entirety, in University of Chicago Maroon, April 11, 1978, p. 8. (Incorporated in Item C-1989(4), below, pp. 780-84.)
For my little abode, I wanted a touch of vintage, but gave it a retro spin. I had been swooning over the ever popular sunburst mirror and decided to just make one myself! It was super easy, cheap, and added just the right amount of vintage for me. Here's the tutorial!
Her dream man, she opened up, would be over 6’4” – not me. He would speak two languages – not me unless you count English English as a second language. He would be willing to be a stay a home dad – been there and could do it again if the comedy thing doesn’t work out and that looks likely. And he would help her do what she had heard they did in some Asian countries: train babies not to need nappies – or diapers, as they are called in America.
It’s not just mermaids. I’ve given one major character haemophilia. One of the children has ‘phossy jaw’, from working in a match factory. Another has a wasting cough – that could surely profit from 'Grove’s Tasteless Chill Tonic', as illustrated. The rodents of London’s sewers are terrified of a patent verminicide called ‘Rough on Rats’. In fact, I can’t think of a single character who gets through The Mourning Emporium without feeling a little unwell at some point.
(Click below to watch video.)
Jesus was letting the religious order of the day know that the thing originally intended by this scripture was about to be accomplished. And, it would be accomplished in/by/through him.
All in all, I am eagerly anticipating the new title. But I hope that Blizzard can inject a little mortality back into their universes. Otherwise the only characters we will care about will be our Hardcore ones.
Currently the bedroom looks like this:
And like the rich (and those who are convinced that a rigged system can make them rich) homos who pollute all discussion everywhere with historical revisionism and history-doesn’t-matter-because-we-fucked-the-T-for-so-long-that-we-have-the-power-to-declare-that-history-doesn’t-matter-ism, the lower-taxes-first arm of gay buffonery (remember Ths John’s quickly-deleted whine about how the last Dubya-era rebate didn’t benefit him?) is as much of a cancer on the body of working-class and/or non-DC LGBT progress as overt, classic Chris Crain-ery.
I absolutely loved J2150, but I do have some tips for those of you first starting out in the course:
“Whats Hood”
But I gave buns to the elephant
We also have weeds in our gardens, and in our yard--actually, all over our yard.
“You’ll never get into college now that you’ve been suspended. Then what’ll happen to you?” she screeched at me as we stood on a street corner in our old neighborhood in Capital Hill.
Girl realizes that in 7 months, she paid as much as she's about to buy a new car for-- and thinks to herself "thanks for screwing me once again, asshat"
you come to me filled with ideas, and I wait to accept any and all you wish to say, think, feel. I see your hesitation and can only greet it with hope. I will never be fulfilled unless you begin. I hold only this one purpose, but I need you to act before that purpose can be satisfied. I long to carry your burdens, share them with you, for that would give me shape, form, and dimension. But, unless, or until you act, I possess none of those things. I am simply empty, so I mutely stare back at you and plead for your mercy.
The silk printed dress is unlined with an exaggerated batwing sleeve. I admit that when you have a larger bust, this kind of sleeve probably does little to "flatter" in the traditional sense. I liked the print too much to care. The style is cut larger so you can size up or down. I am wearing a size 8 and belt or layer with cardigans to make it a little less billowy. It has ample room in the bust, waist, and hips so you can size down if you prefer.
I see grace
Suddenly breeding special species of human beings has gained currency amongst intelligentsia in the country! A leading film star, John Abhram made waves by declaring that every third girl in the country is dying for donor sperms to raise a progeny which will be a class apart in terms of macho looks and brawn! The IVF clinics in the country are having a field day in making tall claims and promises for those without kids! Lord Krishna’s elder brother Balrama was born to parents Devaki and Vasudeva as their seventh son.
Since it’s always more fun to laugh longer do yourself a favor and get all four books. Yes, you can read only this one and have a good time but – splurge – share with friends and have a great time!
Brewed: 03-18-2009
Degrees of (higher) grades from Him, and Forgiveness and Mercy. And Allah is Ever OftForgiving, Most Merciful (V.4:96).
A skydiving experience would cost me about $100 more than a hot air balloon ride, but it would include photos or a video done by a skilled free falling videographer. On the other hand, the hot air balloon ride itself would last 45 minutes-1 hour versus a minute-long skydive with a professional on your back. Then again, skydiving would be more fun if I were to do it alone [even though the pro would be there behind me] compared to a long hot air balloon ride alone with the professional, unless I had someone special to do it with. Oh, and if you haven’t already read my blog about my deal with roller coasters—particularly the huge drops in the course—then falling at 120 mph would probably scare the hell out of me. But so could being so high up in the sky in a tiny space for an hour.
Two future projects are a linen stitch scarf and socks. We’ve knit our share of booties, but not socks. I did start one, but it was a BORING pattern so off the needles it came. As we see new techniques, they’ll be added to the projects we must do.
1.) The new trim added to the curtains was equivalent to a peacock struting around the living room spreading it's feathers.
In a sense, Protestants are correct when they say we worship the mother of Christ. In a sense. I’m not sure if you’re aware of this, but in older times than ours, the term “worship” had a much broader meaning than what is thought of today. When someone says “worship” now, you undoubtedly think of that supreme honor given to God. But did you know, my dear readers, that worship can be defined more broadly as well?
Pictures into frames.
The giant baked potato
I asked Steven to call my Dad to come and get our cat. I didn’t want the cat to wake Iris up, at that point she was locked in the other bathroom, but we couldn’t leave her there like that all night.
Published by The Bubble, 11/11/11
“I don’t know if you’d call that the straw that broke the camel’s back or that last spark that lit the fire that got things moving around here,” tight end Aron White said. “It was definitely time for a change. … It definitely got us going. It definitely lit a fire under us and got us to working and pushing.”
“I Was A Warehouse Wage Slave” by Mac McClelland. It is one of the only funny lines in a grim, essential piece of reporting that makes me grateful that it was written, and will dissuade me from ordering anything from Amazon, which may not be the actual warehouser featured, but which no doubt runs under similar conditions.
Conway – LaShawn it’s been a pleasure. Thank you very much for your time.
541510 Computer systems design & related services
03 Don't Fight it Feel it
Lal Chowk and Residency Road, one finds selling stylish clothes and fast food specialities, located in some of the best shopping malls and lively streets open throughout the day and late evenings.
Matthew Diaz, 33, New York, N.Y.
Someone at the door dear Dutchess..she twittered..
Moving to the northwestern wilderness of Maine to a valley surrounded by tree covered mountains. Our backyard lake reflected the surrounding various colors of the mountains during spring, summer, and autumn each season. During the winter months the lake and the mountains were snow covered contrasting with the clear blue sky from horizon to horizon.
And, of course, I have my routine. And like anyone with a predictable routine, the idea of having it shaken up and turned upside down is scary.
Also well-bred.
- I want to try hard to learn Japanese (had my first lesson on monday ♥)
are damp and leave a cool imprint on the back
This is from a previously written scene. I just cut out everything in between the dialogue. It's a rough draft and unedited, so it still follows the rules. :) To play along, visit Write Anything's [Fiction] Friday.
Another way of seeing the two is the number of theatres screening the movies. Avatar has over 3,000 theatres domestically, while The Hurt Locker, well, you’re lucky to catch it before it disappears from its limited release. The DVD is out, so that really helps if you want to see it before the Awards night.
Best Vacation
He had those stubby hands.
At some inevitable point in the future the UN will reform itself and a Permanent Council made up of America, China, India, Japan, the EU, Russia, Brazil and some African Union member will make all the important decisions. The way things are going, the EU is going to progressively take the place of its more powerful members, as Germany, France, Italy and the UK gradually cede their foreign policy to Brussels. As this happens, the G20 - now the most powerful decision-making bloc in the world - will shrink in size, making it look increasingly ridiculous for Australia and Canada and others to hold onto their exclusive membership. There has got to be another way.
The Garden Intrigue by Lauren Willig
I think they belong to some bacteria.
Backing papers - all from my stash box(I am doing well with this box this year)
Honorable mention goes to Sven Vath's Electric Salsa and Flash and the Pan - Walking in the Rain. Also, check out the other track on that Ramsey Lewis album Sun Goddess.
Who or what motivated you to become a composer?
FREEDOM!
Grant did really good today. He was a bit shy at first, but he warmed up pretty quickly. He has really improved in just one week's time. They asked me if we had been practicing at home. They did some warm ups, practiced kicking it in to the goal, passing back and forth and they did some throw ins. The also played bubbles and with the parachute.
Since, then, “the eyes of the Lord are upon the just” who can in reality harm you in the end, if you be zealous imitators of good, if you take care to conform all your words and actions to the standard of goodness, for, “if the Lord be with us, who is against us?” “All things work together unto good for them that love God.“(Rom 8) Others interpret this verse differently. According to them, the Apostle, in it adduces an argument derived from ordinary experience to confirm what he had already said with reference to God’s Providence regarding his elect. If a man ” be zealous of good,” if he take care to govern his tongue and refrain from retaliation either by word or deed, very few will have any disposition to injure him in his temporal prospects. And in reply to the objection against this interpretation derived from the words of St. Paul, “all that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution” (2 Tim 3:12), they say that the words of St. Paul regard times of persecution for the faith, or at least that the just shall always carry the cross in some shape or other, if not from external persecution, at least from temptations on the part of the leagued enemies of man’s salvation. The first interpretation seems the more probable.—(Vide Paraphrase). “Zealous of good.” In some Greek copies, followers of good. The chief manuscripts and versions are in favour of the Vulgate.
Total Payable Amount RM167.88
Tony had not been feeling well these last few days, so we both slept in. It seemed like he had a nasal infection and was coughing all night. I didn’t get much sleep and in fact I was beginning to get a sore throat. We missed the welcome breakfast at the hotel but would do it the next day.
Blackthorn grows in dense bushes with vicious black thorns and is traditionally used for hedges to keep livestock in the fields.
Thank you, Lord, for this miracle of life.
It's similar to hosting the radio show, because in both instances I get to live a fantasy life for a brief time before checking back in with the real world. It's an escape, but a healthy one (usually). ;)
Now, why would a Martian look like this? Gravity on Mars is only 38 per cent of what it is on earth, hence everything would be easier to push, pull, pick up and carry. If everything weighs less, there would be less need for muscle, hence the reed-like limbs.
Poi Dog Pondering+
Heres a few challenges;
During the second intermission, the presenter announced a giveaway called 'Dance for your dinner', during which people could stand up in the aisle, dance to the music, and the winner would be given a $50 gift certificate to a local restaurant. As several young people began to dance, Fred observing them, stood up, removed his jacket and shuffled to the aisle a few seats away. As the music blared, this small, elfin figure lifted his arms and began to dance, unabashedly and unashamedly. Then he looked over at me and gestured for me to join him. I smiled and shook my head, but this didn't deter him. He waved at me again, using a broader, more expansive movement. Twenty seconds later, there we were, Fred and I dancing in the aisle together. Beaming at me, he echoed the sign I had made at him earlier, raising his hand in a prolonged thumbs up. My small embarrassment disappeared completely and I just gave myself in to the moment.
White Fish (cod, haddock, tilapia)
In comparing population sizes of each region to the average proportion of money these areas were receiving from the government fund, it becomes clear many are not being given representative help.
This blog is accordingly running a poll, to let readers express their opinion. Please use this facility: if a consensus is established it might govern not only the house style of the Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice but other periodicals and titles in the English language. The poll is located at the top of the jiplp weblog sidebar.
6 And the man of God said, Where fell it? And he shewed him the place. And he cut down a stick, and cast it in thither; and the iron did swim.
Once you’ve got the baklava assembled to this point, and BEFORE you place it into the oven to bake, you will need to cut it into pieces. Once the baklava is baked, it’s too delicate to cut without destroying it. Use a very sharp knife and cut the baklava into diamond-shaped pieces using the following pattern:
I see this disparity between the young and old evangelicals, as resulting from their experiences in being in sudden contact with liberal Christians, non-Christians and mass-culture in general. The realizations come fast and furious: Wait, how can we be anti-abortion without caring about what actually happens to children after they are born? This starts them thinking in all kinds of new political ways, as they see what Cardinal Bernardin called "the seamless garment"--the concept that "life issues" include war, poverty, the environment, immigration and other global concerns.Across the nation this week, 53 percent of Republicans were more enthusiastic about voting than usual, compared to 45 percent of Democrats, Gallup reported. But among voters ages 18 to 29, enthusiasm fell by 28 percent since 2008, and by 21 percent among 30- to 49-year-olds.
My kids were basically…well, they were bad. In fact, they haven’t been so bad since Christmas. And before that, since Halloween. Which brings me to the question: What is it about holidays? They’re supposed to be special and magical and happy and stuff.
Well, I was sick alright! I had tonsillitis, headaches and joint pain, and generally felt very under the weather. After a week of antibiotics, today is the first day that I have woken up without a sore throat and hopefully tonight I won't end up with sore shoulders and wrist joint pain again. I have hardly done any stitching on "Cheerful Notes" - last week I just felt too ill to sit too long and stitch and then with the pain in my shoulders and wrists still hanging around in the evenings I haven't been able to do much at all this week.
I got too much sadness n grief,
A: If you are writing for the romance market, the book must have a couple and a happy ending. A book can be romantic but not be a romance (think Nicholas Sparks or Danielle Steele), or have a happy ending and not be a romance. Otherwise the parameters are wide open. I would contend that the best romance novels hold their own against the best novels in any genre. Yes, there are bad ones, but, really, every genre has bad ones. Great romance novels are sublime, just as any great novels are. Books one considers great comes down to taste (after grammar, sentence structure, etc.). We all have different tastes, which is as is should be. I would hate to have only one type of book to read. If you want to learn more about the genre, do check out rwanational.org. And if you’re planning on writing a romance novel, love them. It’ll show up in your writing if you don’t.
Why is that? Do we not trust? Do we not believe? Do we not see?
Our promise is a small, high-quality print-run with direct sales and on-line distribution. Dotterel Press is aiming for a niche market: high quality writing, authors with something new and exciting to say, books that the marketing departments of big publishers can't take a risk on.”
“When did you first love me?” she asks, yet again.
Horrified, Sophie insists that the BFG help her to stop the giants from eating people...but it is going to take a mighty plan and a lot of help.
But stories are vital. Stories never fail us because, as Isaac Bashevis Singer says, “events never grow stale.” There’s more wisdom in a story than in volumes of philosophy. And by a story I mean not only Little Red Riding Hood and Cinderella and Jack and the Beanstalk but also the great novels of the nineteenth century, Jane Eyre, Middlemarch, Bleak House and many others: novels where the story is at the center of the writer’s attention, where the plot actually matters.
1.) You must be a registered follower of my site.
I have been doing a lot of painting lately, hence the lighter than usual blog posts. I have also spent an unreasonable amount of time trying to photograph my paintings. I am starting to hate my light hungry camera. In the photo above you can't even tell that there is a small amount of gold leaf and the grays vary far more than the photo shows.
"I thought you liked working for the florist?"
Program of the Year
Moral and ethical issues and democratic values get subordinated in the face of corruption perpetuated by the oppressive caste system. There is not even the remotest desire to make democracy more functional. The caste system with graded inequality remains popular amongst those whose privileges are associated with it. For the same reason, the idea of egalitarian society fails to gain currency in their quarters. Lessons like, “United we stand and divided we fall” are hard to learn and even if by mistake they are learnt, they become hard to implement. Caste is meant to divide, not unite. A nation which lost its freedom on that account should be cautious, lest its divisions drive it to a state of subservience to an alien rule again. What ‘hidden pride’ lies in discriminating against and oppressing one’s own countrymen and co-religionists is hard to discern.
MORE SUSPENSFUL: A bachelor will lose his entire fortune if he is not married by tomorrow.
After relaxing on our balcony, we headed to Tiki’s in Waikiki to meet up with fellow Fodorites (Melissa, Lucy, Paula, David, Hank, and Janice). Tony and I met Melissa and Lucy back in 2003 with other Fodories. I told Melissa I would like to meet at Tiki’s. Love the place and the food. She made the arrangements with the marketing manager, got us a nice table, complimentary parking for 3 hours (which was the right amount of time) and we had a great time. We received complimentary pupu’s: Kalbi beef gyoza, ahi-tuna spread with toast, and edamame that was coated in a decadent white truffle oil. The edamame was so good that some of us used the empty edamame shells and toast to sop up the oil. The gyoza and tuna tartar was also delicious.
...makes me happy.
No, you won'' t grow quality witloof crops again, but after some time you'll see small leaves grow out of it, still a delight to add to a salad or dish.
Iván Meade – Who or what has influenced your style?
broadcast LIVE on Emmanuel TV
Great sandwich for a Mother’s Day grill out with family and friends. Add a side of grilled asparagus, hummus with carrots and celery, fresh fruit, or baked fries and it’s a party.
The assistant nodded and returned to his desk to call the duty pilot.
Vena Cava - 90's? check. Black? Yes. Rose-tinted hues? YES. Three of my favorite things at the moment all together in one place!Jill Stuart - This color palette is simply amazing - the navy, mustards and oranges are definitely something I can see myself wearing. And I can't help but absolutely love the fox and owl (hello, I love owls!!) prints.Jenni Kayne - Jenni Kayne is a designer that I came to really love thanks to my internship at Glamour, her stuff is just so cute and wearable. I loved all the mini dresses in this collection and also the pops of bold hues.
To celebrate this awesome day, the CropStop Creative Team challenges you to scraplift one of their posted projects below. Choose your project, create your own version of it, and link it to the CropStop Challenge Blog National Scrapbook Day Challenge post.
Whatever direction you go, except south (where the sea is dummy), you'll discover loads of real life in what's called Zagora, the hinterland of that glorious coast.
It’s very nice that they do that, that they allowed us to keep the basics we would need to live, but I also learned in 2009 that they actually HAVE to do that. They told me they had to, “there are laws in place to protect the innocent,” although sometimes I felt like somehow those laws weren’t enacted on my behalf because there were MANY things that did not work out for me, truth be told. Color me able to relate to the investment scheme victims in that regard, as well, I guess!
Paul’s Final Greetings
7. Favorite Christmas movie?
dimmu borgir @ Zeche Carl bochum, germany (1999.03.30)
Of the sight, of the US Flag, that was always
Aurelius peered down his nose at his docile burden. “You give up too easily.”
Hollande has already promised to renegotiate the fiscal compact signed by the eurozone nations or to 'complete it' with programs for 'growth' - which, translated means huge increases in taxes on 'the rich' and on corporations to fund massive government spending to create public sector jobs,build infrastructure, finance green energy scams and the rest of the usual socialist agenda. Apparently the examples of Greece,Portugal, Ireland and Spain haven't registered.
I don't really like going out when it's so cold!
Whatever game you play, you’re going to encounter a boss or two (or hundreds). Some of these bosses are so memorable that we’re still talking about them (or resurrecting them…) years later. One of my guildies last night was talking about something he’d like to see as a boss mechanic, and it made me wonder: if we could build our own bosses, what would they be like?
The new US online paper The Algemeiner (I highly recommend it) also writes about the boycott, this time from the angle of the harm it causes davka to the Palestinians whom the boycotters presume to be helping.
Brian couldn't describe with words the peace and joy that flooded his life when he walked away from everything and followed after God. The world can give us its version of glory, but Brian explained that we were created to desire God. Nothing we consume will quench our yearning for God and His glory.
I'm following a course 'digital photography'.
June 16 Orlando, FL Amway Center
Eastern Catholics (those Catholics which celebrate other liturgies such as the Byzantine, Armenian, Coptic or Syrian liturgy) generally adopted the later Roman practice of delaying communion until “the age of reason” once they entered union with Rome (1500 – 1700s A.D.) and thus discontinued infant Communion. This is explained by Pope Benedict XIV’s encylical Allatae Sunt (On the Observance of the Oriental Rites), given 26 July 1755. First, Pope Benedict XIV explains that:
It’s past time churches and ministries come clean. Judgment begins at the household of God.
“We have found that the boomer client is more technologically savvy, and we can connect with them through social media, email marketing and video messages. Their time horizons for investing allow for different types of planning. This opens the door to a larger array of products.”
Enjoy!!!
The difference being:
P.S. Congrats to Yoochun for his award at the Baeksang Awards~! Although Yoohwan didn’t win to make it a legendary brother-brother win. =(
Lori entered THREE times. She made her comment on our BLOG
This is where the watcher consciousness or self awareness comes in – to know that’s not who you are, nor who you want to be. You have to be able to delve into that pain, and through regular Reiki, prodding via thinking (meditation) about the “Why” “How” “When”, resolve the root cause of the blockage utilizing another tool with Reiki – Meditation.
Finding the messages can be difficult at first, but it will get easier with time. The hardest part is to take the lessons and filter them through an unbiased lens. Your lens and mine are more often than not only letting things through that we already believe, things that are totally slanted to our biases. If you can at least keep this in mind as you contemplate a new idea, you open the door to the possibility of actually learning, growing, and becoming a bigger, more tolerant, compassionate person.
Another region, when buying property in Italy' heading, but there is the airport bologna italy if you had an Amalfi Coast and Portofino are stunning. Also, you would need to be served the bologna italy maps in Italy. This included commercial, residential and speculative investment purchases by foreign nationals purchasing real estate market offers great investment and money making opportunities. It is rich and complex starting from before ancient Roman Empire from the bologna italy restaurant in the bologna italy jobs an Italian citizen, with one exception. In the rental bologna italy with the bologna italy photos of Rome's great empire in the bologna italy restaurant. The Germans assumed power of Italy, representing the bologna italy hotels in Constantinople. They tried to keep the bologna italy restaurant was formed. This brought some stability and prosperity and indeed Rome saw its territory expand quite dramatically. It was around this time, a peculiar situation of having two popes arose...indeed this then led to three! At one stage the bologna italy stm in Avignon due to instability in Rome. Many foreign nationals during those times of Hippocrates. Italian spas enjoy the bologna italy restaurant are looking to buy as an investor, it would be able to use any other Italian city. Prime sights to enjoy in Rome are The Colosseum, Vatican museums, The Pantheon, Tabularium, and much more. Rome is the bologna italy restaurant a part of the weather bologna italy and see the famous white property known as one of Europe's most disaster-prone countries. The country is one such area. It is luring real estate within Italy. This included commercial, residential and vacation purposes.
We also did a sieving of some malt. This is done with milled malt to see what your grist looks like. Six different sized screens are used and the malt is sieved through the screens. A certain percentage of larger matter stays on the bigger screens and so on until the bottom where you find flour. Based off of this you can adjust your mill, or adjust the mash to better utilize the grist you have. The rest of the day was 3 hours of Chemical Technical Analysis lectures. Towards the end I was getting pretty worn out. The shear amount of information that has entered my brain this week is insane, but that is exactly what I signed up for.
The UI Layer for PicShop is fully GPU accelerated, which translates into extremely low battery consumption for you, and a beautifully smooth 60hz interface that is a joy to use.
I have visited many of you in the last several months but have not left any comments. Personal stuff going on.
Another interpretation is that this passage is talking about the nation of Israel. Those who argue for this position advocate that the description given in verses four through six fits Israel as a nation. They had once been enlightened, and had tasted the heavenly gift. They had become partakers of the Holy Spirit under the Old Covenant administration. They had the word of God, and had tasted the power of the age to come.
Because we make each mix by hand we are
And so we come to the fifth and last step: to meet Christ yourself. For the risen Christ is very much alive; and I believe that he will reveal himself to you if you ask him to, and if you make room in time and efforts to find him. Seek him in his Word, in his sacraments, in his real presence in the Blessed Sacrament; in prayer, in his Church, in those who follow him most closely.
Dreams have been studied throughout history, and dream interpretation has tried to make sense of these nighttime visitations for as long as their have been people to dream. People who could interpret dreams, and those whose dreams were particularly vivid, where often thought to be imbued with divine powers, and they were given a special place in their societies.
Me: (Turning red at the critique) Sorry…?
I mean, when you randomly find yourself with a nearly endless supply of something highly desirable to people, you have to do something with it, right? Like you damn women with your damn lady bits. Or stumbling across a huge cache of diamonds. You're set for life.
And called on Him to save,
Bring how u feel
It has been a moment of great intimacy, but of course we couldn’t do without a walk and some shopping.
Sandy Lemon
To those who don't know me, GH is minimalist and I am more in to "que sera sera", what I like, I put it there, thing? And I am loving it. So, we both comprimes... 50-50 and we both gave a HI-5!
2: Who was your favourite character and what district are they from? (Capitol and District 13 count)
Y'know, the important style questions.
This is also a very different type of faith and spirituality than the Rick Warrens and Mark Driscolls of the world tend to cultivate (as I’ve said), and so to criticize Douthat’s supposed ignoring of their “living out” his ideas is to fundamentally misunderstand what he’s saying. Last week, I heard him in an interview (audio) say that he is promoting a Christianity that relies less on individual personalities upon which entire denominations stand and fall. He wants the core message to be the focus, not the person up-front.
Have a supercalifragilisticexpialidocious weekend everyone! (I'm allowed to say that because Beth has dubbed me Susanna Poppins! :))
I think I may have just found my slogan…
I think I’m missing something important here. And it’s something that I truly wish I understood.
SCENARIO ONE:
I have used running to meditate through a lot of changes this year. Coming full circle back to Monterey in what seems like the blink of an eye has me turning them over in my mind again. Geekydaddy quit the business he was trying to start and took a new job, one that he loves but that makes huge demands on his time and mental energy. Geekygirl started Kindergarten at a wonderful, but challenging inner city school that makes demands on mine. My company merged the San Francisco office with the one in San Diego into a "one company/two locations" model, bringing with it the stress of forced change, rivalries, opportunities and the logistical issues of working with people in an office 500 miles away. I have become a regular on the Virgin America early flight from SFO to SAN, and the children now have more toys from that city's airport gift store than I had ever thought possible to buy.
Ok ... Got to go... Just found out last night that there's a zine exchange tonight and I actually managed to put a few pages together for it! Got to print it now! I'll post about it asap!
Please e-mail your addresses to my assistant Christen (ckrumm@litfusegroup.com)
Dougie
Anyway, I'm going to show my desks to the world and link up to Julia's WOYWW where she gets a load of us crafters to share our spaces with you - whatever that space may be! Go HERE to see what I'm talking about and perhaps join in if you feel like it.
Authors: Robert M. Kunstadt⇓ and Ilaria Maggioni (R. Kunstadt, P.C.)
granting me utterance as I spend quality time praying in other tongues,
Broke your heart, made you cry,
I've been hesitant to post on here. I think it's all out of fear. I guess I should start with the news. I'm pregnant. Two days after my last post I took a test and it was positive. I find it funny that while I was posting about how I'm afraid I'll never be pregnant or have a child, that I was in fact pregnant. I'm 7 weeks and 3 days today.
- The limited button scheme on the Game Boy/Game Boy Color is an issue here, since even the Sword and Shield must take up either the A or B button, meaning that you’re constantly pausing the action and fiddling with Link’s inventory more than ever!
I also had a nice pint of my best bitter. Consett is where my wife comes from.
Raise your hand if you think this is going to be ironic in a few years: My first post about contemplating motherhood is the product of a nightmare involving the anti-christ.
I conjure you,
1. There is an alternate universe filled with our missing socks and one legged doppelgangers.
Pretty Nails with one of my cupcakes.^_^
One of the bulls stands in solitary splendor on his own little island in the bull paddock. He has some trees to stand under, some cows to talk to over the fence, and the corner of a shed to scratch on, so he is happy.
Red Runner didn't stop, just took off into the still-dark early morning. I pulled over to inspect the damage to Seattle Mom's van and was relieved to find there wasn't any, just some dark paint smudged on the front and Red Runner's trim curled up like a handlebar mustache in the lower grill. I broke it off before driving home but in retrospect should have left it there because oh my gosh, so silly and curly! While inspecting the car, several kind Seattleites ran over and congratulated me on my cheetah-like reflexes.
‘The political action committees of those institutions have distributed $169,499 through March 31 to the campaign coffers of the 10 freshman Tea Party-backed lawmakers on the House Financial Services Committee, according to an analysis of campaign finance disclosure records’.
Bapat is one of the associate scientists of the newly formed International Earthquake and Volcano Prediction Center (IEVPC) based in Orlando, Florida in the United States.
004.102 YUSUFALI: When thou (O Messenger) art with them, and standest to lead them in prayer, Let one party of them stand up (in prayer) with thee, Taking their arms with them: When they finish their prostrations, let them Take their position in the rear. And let the other party come up which hath not yet prayed - and let them pray with thee, Taking all precaution, and bearing arms: the Unbelievers wish, if ye were negligent of your arms and your baggage, to assault you in a single rush. But there is no blame on you if ye put away your arms because of the inconvenience of rain or because ye are ill; but take (every) precaution for yourselves. For the Unbelievers Allah hath prepared a humiliating punishment.
3) Meanwhile, make the seafood stock. Combine anchovies and shrimp in the water, bring to boil first, then simmer over low heat for 5 minutes. Let it cool and strain the stock. Reserve 1 cup.
The U.S. economy continues to confound its critics, whether those who believe we sink or swim with Europe, or are tied too closely to the Chinese economy, or those who believe austerity is the only answer. But European austerity measures in particular are a failure, as Nobelist Paul Krugman has been saying in columns, such as “Death of a Fairy Tale”, while our Fed continues to provide stimulus with record low interest rates.
and books
Or is freedom simply having the right to try?
The world of Helminthdale Libraries is become a darker, more savage one than the one I had been chronicling. To be sure, there was always that cruel feral streak of the girls' playground about the place and there were always too many smiling assassins but things have grown appreciably worse as Call Me Dave's austerity measures have hit what was already a basket case of a local economy.
The evening centered around helping the audience understand the world through the eyes of an ex-racehorse, and to help us to size up the potential and best use of the individual OTTB. Someone has already summarized the event in a brief horseadoption.com article if you want to read it. I’ll cover it in a bit more detail but overall it was fun, informal, the food was delicious, and I would have spent twice the amount of the ticket for this experience. Bob went too, and he enjoyed it as well.
Why did he let her leave, with his own back turned?
There’s been plenty of nonsense written about initiation down through the years, but the basic concept is easy enough to grasp. The symbolic and ritual tools of magical practice can be used to set off the same set of reactions that allow a child, or for that matter a baby baboon, to stock its social self with the nonverbal and emotionally charged patterns of its social group. This is done in a careful and controlled way, with patterns that further the process of magical training, and the candidate—the person going through the initiation—is taught nonverbal signals that allow him or her to activate the new patterns when it’s time to use them, and deactivate them when it’s time to deal with the nonmagical world. In the short term, this makes it possible to practice magic without too much psychological strain; in the long term, the experience of shifting from one set of arbitrary social patterns and emotional charges to another teaches the reasoning mind to detach itself from the social self altogether, and think its own thoughts rather than those of its society.
We're safe inside our little world, but I still long to hear
In a medium bowl, whisk together eggs, milk, and nutmeg. Season with salt and pepper.
And what happened?
I just added Dominique's
19) Do you always have to look this good?! You are driving me bananas! +
I am the gentle autumn's rain.
We are back where we were the first time Austin finished cancer treatment, when we assumed his kidney would keep chugging along until puberty when rapid growth and muscle development would put such stress on the little organ that it would stop working and finally need to be replaced. That scenario was thrown completely out the window during his relapse, as the kidney seemed to plunge deeper and deeper into distress, caused by the relentless onslaught of surgery, radiation and chemo. A year ago, we were hoping for a kidney that would work for weeks and months, not years and years.
The irony is that the same work I did in the elimination of their jobs also was put into place within HP to totally outsource their managed services department. I worked myself out of a job. There have been job opportunities that I have turned down, jobs that would have been very good money, because I just will not do that type of work ever again, better I be hurting then to inflict that pain on many others. I am sure someone will do the job, but, it will not be me and I will sleep better at night. It is time for everyone to take some form of action. Write to your reps and let them know that the war is wrong and the troops need to come back now, that the economy is the big picture and needs to be fixed fast. Try to do what you can with buying local, but as many above have stated, it is hard to distinguish what is behind the corporate logo and their clever ways to hide and disguise the truth and put a spin on any questionable practice.
I had to forget something crucial when I was packing, didn't I? Toothpaste, that's what. On Saturday morning, I told someone in passing that I'd forgotten mine and had had to use soup (bleurgh). An hour or so later, Jeremy Guy, one of the extraordinary team of organisers, came up to me and said he'd heard I'd forgotten my toothpaste and I really should have told him.
You can’t heal a wound by saying it is not there!
ULTRAMAN TIGA debuts on Japan’s MBS network. This series marked a new beginning to the Ultraman saga featuring updated special effects and a whole new take on the familiar Ultraman mythology. A new series followed nearly every year including Ultraman Gaia, Ultraman Cosmos and Ultraman Nexus.
OK, here goes.
Then he recommended the surgery first thing this morning, Wednesday morning. We could chance it, let it fall off on its own and go on about our business, but he was concerned that if she had any lesions beneath the nail, they could eventually become infected and turn into something much worse than an ugly toenail. I just want to do what’s best for Anna, what will leave her the least psychologically scarred in life.
"My colleague and I were discussing, at length, the art of tattooing (it was, after all, Friday afternoon!).
Freida Pinto looks out of place as Phaedra. In a film (loosly) based on Greek mythology, you would expect the oracle to have some resemblance to an original Greek Goddess. Also, Frieda’s accent and mannerisms do her character no good. Henry Cavill is beefy and strong but has poor dialogue delivery skills. The others are just about average. But it’s hard to display your acting skills when you’re only role is to fight and die.
Instead of a rat race attacker.
- Bluetooth Serial module
Special Agent Lucas Avery has dealt with some tricky puzzles in his time, but this is stranger than anything he’s ever encountered. His one lead is a pair of names: ‘Gwen’ and ‘Rhys’...
We've been planning this big Oktoberfest party for over a year. Late last summer we had a long meandering conversation about having a big party in our backyard with beer and sausages on the grill and how we could finally use our outdoor firepit and how wonderful it would be to celebrate our favorite month, October. This party has been in the back of my mind since then. It's been really really big, and then a little more manageable, and now it is almost here. I'm very excited.
The acting head of the Colwyn Borough Police Department was suspended today while borough and county officials investigate an incident involving a juvenile who was Tasered while handcuffed in a holding cell at the department.
I had various plans for this afternoon, but annoying bits of life intervened and I hardly got anything done. I think I'll have an early night and give it another go tomorrow. It's the Sage's sale on Friday and I haven't got my papers ready yet - not that I have a lot, he does most of the bookwork as you'd expect at this stage. I don't exactly dread it, but I don't enjoy the sales any longer. And we've got three this year.
If you like my punch art, and you don't have this punch, BUY IT TODAY before it is gone. I will not stop using it in my punch art unless mine breaks. And I don't know of any other place you can find one except Stampin' Up!. Maybe I need to buy a back up butterfly!
falling iPhone, if you drop that one it is Game Over! Don't let slimy cooties get you either! Collect tons of power ups, ward off cooties, keep collecting and dodging to the highest score. Toys is Multiplayer! Play against people all over the world competing for the highest score! You can invite your Facebook friends and Twitter to play with you and make them jealous of your highest scores right from inside the game!
Yesterday, US federal agents announced they would seize the disputed artifact from Sotheby’s in New York and try to return it to its rightful home in Cambodia.
at the back of her tongue. A whisper
The collaboration between you and The Steady Tiger – James van Minnen – is pure magic.
Become aware of it.
As the drab concrete walls rushed upwards we realized the entire room was actually a giant elevator, and we were descending. Into what, I had no idea.
May yet emerge the putrid corpses of events
It was extremely beautiful, and very cold; around -10degC on average. As the air was dry, I didn't have any problems with my Canon 5D2 fogging up, and it behaved perfectly. I did manage to get a few good shots under grey skies, but my fingertips just about broke off with the cold, as I would have to remove my gloves to adjust the camera settings.
He just smiled and gave me confidence. He said; “Go ahead and try.”
But this time, my friend suggested I take the L because it stops exactly where I needed to go. "But I've never taken the L!" I said in a panic. Just thinking about the logistics put me in a cold sweat. Where do I catch it? Where do I park? How much is parking? How do I get a ticket for the L? Or do they use tokens? There are a million stops downtown, how do I know where I'm supposed to get off? Blue line, brown line, pink line, how do I know which line to take? What if I get mugged and someone steals my camera? Then I won't have any proof that I actually took the L and if I can't blog about it, then why bother? Thankfully, my friends are used to my insanity, so they just roll their eyes and tell me to get a grip.
Thank you to everyone else who left comments, it's lovely to hear from you and very much appreciated, as always.
And it occurs to me, shockingly enough, that I have just figured out what I want to be when I grow up. I want to be someone who has more and more and more really good stories to tell.
Hello all,
“Kumita lang nang malaki, maganda na? ‘Di ba pwedeng overhyped muna?”
Product: The concealer is really creamy and smooth. It is not heavy or thick but it does get a bit stiff when applying because it does dry pretty quickly. I believe that’s because the product is waterproof. Once this dries and sets it will not move until you take it off. If you dab this on and blend right away, it blends beautifully! I love Makeup Forever products because when they say something is waterproof, it usually is. Once applied it does not look cakey or dry. It looks very natural and gives full coverage. When I put this on this seems to wake me up…or at least it gives the ILLUSION that I’m awake although I feel like the walking dead. It’s used not only to conceal eye bags but also to brighten the complexion and the eye area. If your eyes are looking dark from tiredness or just from discoloration this helps a lot.
But after spending a few moments thinking about this and doing a mental inventory of all my "things" I finally came to the conclusion that my most unique item I own would be the scrapbook from Cripple Creek dating back to 1913. It really is most unique and interesting and a real treasure. I am sure most of you if you have been hanging around here a while remember this book. If you are new to my blog and don't know what I am talking about, you can read about it here and here. There are lots of pictures in the earlier post of the inside.
True words seem paradoxical.
9. Slankets, yes or no?
6. Return shellfish to pan. Add the pasta. Mix well.
Because we are a very small company, that works with real craftsman,
When she gets home today, I’m going to have a list of all my foods I’ve eaten, and work with her to put them on the correct blanks. Then I’ll make sure (with her help, of course), to balance my “chart” at supper or for a planned bedtime snack. I think I’ll print off two more copies to let her have one to fill out, and maybe my daughter will join us (hehe)!
The woman is stereotypical South of Broad old money, a southern belle born a century too late. Lupus and liver spots render her hands grotesque, but she grips Devoy’s wrist with surprising strength as she speaks. “He’s always got those little white plugs in his ears, never hears a word I say.” Mrs. Murphy wheezes. “And that’s only the times his father makes him come visit me. He just sits in the corner and glares. It ain’t right.” Devoy nods patiently as she struggles for another breath. “You do exorcisms, don’t you?”
I am reworking on my dresser. It is the very one that I have in my living / dining room.
Lombardi interviewed over 1,000 moms online and in person. She found that nearly nine in ten moms described themselves as "extremely close" or "very close" to their sons. And the result of these close relationships is that we are creating a generation of boys who will become strong, loving spouses and partners, with a higher level of sensitivity and emotional intelligence. As Lombardi notes, "A new and growing body of scientific literature shows that sons who are close to their mothers are emotionally and physically healthier than those who are not."
Buddy Fite - guitar
lit on fire
Sl st "hat band" in complementary color.
"Not yet. I'm going back to the human side tomorrow."
This young woman knew she couldn’t care for her baby, so she began taking steps toward adoption. She sought out a family, she invited them into her pregnancy and then on the day her daughter was born, she set her into the arms of loving, adoptive parents.
and turning into a wealth
True? Or just a strong negotiating position?
It was a dark, cold and stormy night......
On another note. We lost a local eagle today! It flew into some electric lines & was killed instantly!
Palmer discovers the dark side of Ocala. He comes across a Pagan ritual that combines an actual goat sacrifice with a ritualized and symbolic sacrifice of a young woman. He locates the body of a young woman who attended the festival in a shallow grave when he is looking for the loot.
Here in Alaska we are faced with several real potentials for disasters. All of our plans detail our little family being able to stop whatever we are doing, and jump into the main BOV that awaits us in the driveway.
Have a great weekend full of fun things and not laundry.
with the approach it boasts upon
“An inability to begin or continue writing for reasons other than lack of basic skill or commitment”
Grumble less. Giggle more!'
It was good that I hired Melvin. My first few days were pretty rough. On my first day as a sales representative, I had some trouble with my GPS unit. I had bought it second-hand from my Uncle Earl. He said he had gotten it from some fellow who had gotten in a little trouble, didn't need it anymore, and was going away for a long time. I don't like to develop preconceived notions, but I think the guy may have been a mass murderer or a serial killer. Every time I punched in a destination I would end up either at a crime scene with FBI investigators, and miles of yellow tape, or in an isolated national park next to what looked like shallow graves.
Here’s my latest hypothesis: my job is preventing me from having a boyfriend. Why do I think this? Of my five co-workers, one is a single mom, two are single, one is widowed, and one has a bad marriage. All of these people are above the age of 40. The signs don’t bode well for me.
First rule: Do not use semicolons. They are transvestite hermaphrodites representing absolutely nothing. All they do is show you’ve been to college.
Tried to seperate tracks but the damn free software just wouldnt do as it was told.This will give you something to do.
He walks by each time and looks into my eyes for warmth I think. Large glasses, a slow heavy gait. His face is always in worry, until he looks back and tries to hand me his smile. Gentle. I’ve never spoken to him but it seems I know him better than I know the others that swarm this hive. Never once have they kept contact without searching for something unattainable, to discern whether I am worthy of their sins or not.
The thing is, Bermuda has been to the adoption show at Petsmart twice now, and nobody has expressed interest in her. Maybe her shyness puts people off. All I know is, she's an adorable little doggy, housetrained, good with other dogs, good at walking on a leash, etc, who would be a great addition to someone's family!
Denise: One of the things I looked for in a publisher was the ability to have my books published in print and ebook. I love ebooks! They are terrific because of the quick access to any number of books in the blink of an eye and also the ability to carry hundreds of books with you without the bulk.
But it was curious, though not surprising given the sources, that three recent articles mentioning the Blogfest and the Brooklyn blogging boom, including the cover story in today's New York Times City section, ignored Atlantic Yards, notably this web site and No Land Grab.
because over 13,000 executive orders obviates the very idea of consultation and compromise? Has Congress in effect resigned itself to posture more as a debating society rather than a legislative body? My partisanship with respect to Executive Order 13603, the appointment of czars and capricious findings by cabinet departments that use the police power to drive politically motivated goals is evident. However, we should all be alarmed: government by decree is precisely what our Constitution was designed to avoid. Polls show 90% hold Congress in disdain. If the people were to be fully aware of the extent to which we are ruled by decree, the institution of the presidency would lose a much respect and a big chunk of its legitimacy. If our society is to function with a high degree of civility and consensus, this is not the way to operate. This may seem a nerdy campaign issue given the big issues of economic performance, debt and entitlement. If congressional earmarks was a subject for debate, I believe government by executive order ought to be raised. The candidates should be made to explain how they will govern. We, the citizens, should consider how we will allow ourselves to be governed. Cordially, Larry Greenberg
Saturday... the market in Apt and a tour of one of the oldest villages in the Luberon.. Oppede Le Vieux...
Tyndale has given me a certificate to give away to any of my readers. If you would like a copy of this book, leave a comment. On May 7, I will draw a name from the comments and announce the winner on May 8 on my twitter and Facebook page.
General Zinni’s Answer – What’s important is how you view the leadership in your organization. If you view the leadership as top down, the leadership is a structure – there is a line and a chain – There are designated bosses. So, leadership in your organization is through that line, through that chain, through those tiers, through those individuals, and comes from the top and goes down to the bottom, which is a common way people think about it. You’re missing the boat.
The purpose of that short caveat being I love the way Poe writes, as he makes it very easy to draw a picture or watch the movie in my mind while I’m reading the story.
Another cocktail I can amuse you with is this bad boy here:
If I can be said to strongly identify as anything, it is as a smart person. I have identified as a smart person for the majority of my life, and it is something that I take pride in, however foolishly. I think that some of my experiences in the gifted program in my schooling lead me to believe that being intelligent and being creative were separate, mutually exclusive things.
If somehow you haven’t heard
From the ashes into the fire? Hopefully not, even though equities are trading at extreme lows in nominal terms. Now, if you read Bloomberg, or pretty much any normal basic assessment by a stock analyst, things look pretty grim if you’re looking at 24 P/E for an index, as is the case for the Nikkei 225 at the moment. 5 000 before 25 000, much less 50 000, clear as day, right?
Oh live…
Last Saturday afternoon, I saw a Northern Broadsides production at The New Vic Theatre , Newcastle-under-Lyme...in The Potteries...land of Arnold Bennett.... and all those towns, whose names I learned for geography O level... and strangely, have never forgotten........
3. I Remember You
It looks like the dogs and I will be confined to the house for the next couple of weeks, to avoid the ticks and also unwanted attention from the male dogs of the village, as Beki is in season.
but still use motivation on your way to bail
If you like hazelnut? Well, I'm still kind of iffy on this one. It's kind of thin and sweet, and the hazelnut's pretty up-front, on the verge of being over-powering. You'll probably want to try it for yourself.
Where do you store your alternative clothing items? Where do you store your costumes from Halloweens, conventions, or events? Is it easy or difficult to find the space? Do you have any storage tips to share?
Whenever a user needs to complete a set of activities to submit information via a software application, wizard is used. Whether it’s applying for an online job, filing taxes or purchasing items online, wizard is used. The most important elements of a wizard are:
You can find information on Twig here: www.twigthefairy.com/
Continue cooking it all on high heat until rice is heated through and veggies are cooked.
The more and more that I think about it, this idea of sin all boils down to selfishness. There isn’t a single sin in my life (and I would argue anyone’s life) that can’t be summed up by my selfishness. Selfishness looks out for one thing and one thing only: my own interest. Selfishness makes a person ugly and unappealing inside and out. Selfishness leaves a person empty, alone and hopeless, yet in the midst of it, selfishness promises instant gratification previously unknown.
1) Thank the person who nominated me and link back to them in my post.
Moffat also confirmed that plans for the anniversary extend beyond a one-off special episode.
I love my job.
Been slammed again and again with work. But luckily some of it is art related and therefore I do have some more things to post and share! A few works in progress and some completed pieces back over on my DA.
The design of your own Wedding Genealogy Chart that is customized to your event. Each chart details the relationships of the bride and groom to their various guests, calling out interesting connections and occasional little-known fact.Choose from three distinct design styles.
These birds are such machinery:
I am not convinced Austin & MacAuley are offering anything more (at best) than the better author solutions services, and that is giving the benefit of the doubt to an ‘independent trade publisher’ willing to ask perspective authors to ‘contribute’ a four-figure amount to the publication of their book. Austin & MacAuley are attempting to operate Partnership Publishing like Pen Press (PPS 233.13), Epic Press (EPS 186.09), Derwent Press (DWP 194.02), Book Guild Publishing (BGP 218.05) and Matador (MAT 256.20). As publishing develops new models to move forward, this model of publishing is coming more to the forefront, and I actually believe UK publishers are ahead of their US cousins on this. But when Partnership Publishing is on the table as an option, the author must at least know from the outset that this is potentially one of the models on offer to them and more importantly that it will come at a cost. It must never be introduced to the author/publisher partnership after submission. When a publisher does this, and suggests a financial contribution is required, it renders the idea of a partnership between author and publisher as the poor cousin of publishing, rather than a reasonable and viable alternative for a book.
George Cortina
Although the series (both books and films) is now complete and everyone in the fandom is feeling the loss to some extent, the US is fairly well-served for Potter-related entertainment from the theme park in Florida (and soon to be in Los Angeles) as well as conferences taking place all over
Yes, I believe in a Creator, the living God of the Bible, one God in three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
As many of you know, I make random remarks on the ever popular Facebook, and I know that many of the people on my “friends” list think I am amusing. They think my remarks “quirky” and my wit dry, but a very select few of them KNOW that there is more truth in those words than the average person would be comfortable with.
“Open-access (OA) literature is digital, online, free of charge, and free of most copyright and licensing restrictions. OA removes price barriers (subscriptions, licensing fees, pay-per-view fees) and permission barriers (most copyright and licensing restrictions).“
According to Aristotle the best government is one with just laws, an aristocracy and the society has a strong middle class.
Cavanagh’s bills that would require the association to be subject to open meetings and freedom of information laws, introduced in mid-2011, are unlikely to advance in the Republican-led Michigan Legislature. Similar measures in past years have fizzled because the MCCA
0: Custom dump
Avery Brewing Company Collaboration Not Litigation Ale
What you do:
Soon after, the president met with US troops at Bagram Air Force Base and addressed them with compassion and forthrightness. “I know the battle’s not yet over. Some of your buddies are going to get injured and some of your buddies may get killed and there will be heartbreak and pain and difficulty ahead. But there’s light on the horizon because of the sacrifices you’ve made.” He ended, “I could not be prouder to be your commander-in-chief.”
Common errors in the calculation of the expectation
MASSIVE NUMBERS OF NEW WHISTLEBLOWERS COMING FORWARD
"I'll be here. I'll watch your drink."
At least one member of the Osirian Court was of an entirely different species to the others: Thoth, who has dominion over time.
Tonight’s the bonfire rally
Now, after that affirmation, I have to admit that when G and Rick decided last weekend to climb a local 'hill' which to me is a 'mountain', I stayed at home, stitching!
The Memorial itself is amazing, even in its unfinished state. And the sculptor behind the Memorial was a remarkable person.
We went out a lot in college. It seems like we went to the Pub on Wednesdays, and then the Cabaret on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays. We loved to dance. Disco was where it was at. Sometimes we drove a pretty far distance to go to another club, just to change it up every once in a while. But,sometimes it is good to stay with what you know. My roommate, Pat, found that out one night, in a bar, in another town …..in the Twilight Zone.
It's that time of year when we unwittingly torture our canine friends by preparing and eating (in front of them) an inordinate amount of rich, savory, gravy-coated food while they stare at a bowl of the usual old daily kibble. Well, actually, our dogs ignore the kibble entirely and just stare at us as we eat. They watch every fork-full move from plate to mouth. That is, until we tell them to stop begging and lay down, which they do, begrudgingly.*
PS – The following websites are focused more on ministering to men “in general.” I’ll include Top Ten lists later that will focus on top websites for fathers, top websites for husbands, etc.
Her assessment of Smith is right on the nail. He works as an actuary for an insurance firm in London. He’s twenty-seven, a popular age to die, although John Keats, whose poetry and philosophy of life features, was only twenty-five. In chapter ten Cate gets to see Alice deliver a lecture on Keats, albeit one on film as she has been suspended from actual teaching duties. The talk ends with…
Serves 6-8 easily
4. Lastly, I can now add, if you 'like' me on facebook you will receive another entry
That being said, as you watch this, may you consider it advise not in what is necessary to forgive another for their wrong doing, but to forgive oneself for one’s own errors of being. Of course that being said, if you do find that you may wish to correct something about yourself so that you never harm another in such a way again, remember to have a little compassion for yourself, afterall, their was a reason you were mistaken in your approach to begin with, even if now it is time to grow up and out of the past that had created you accordingly.
We took our trip south to the Monterey and Carmel area where we relaxed with beautiful surroundings and winter sun. Found a breakfast place in Pacific Grove that served a fabulous frittata. No complaints...great place to sit and watch the waves.
Plan B worked out great. Such is supper at my house!
Emi is a writer, and a good one at that. She's been doing writing "role-playing", where two authors collaborate online to create a story, scene by scene, since she was something like 10 years old, and thus has written hundreds of thousands of words of fiction. That's her main form of writing, but she also occasionally writes non-fiction in the form of really good responses in online debates and discussions, has recently developed a love of poetry, especially haiku, and has turned out a couple of haiku that I really like, though she's more critical of them (unsurprisingly). She also tackled NaNoWriMo this year, and finished victorious on November 29th (one day before the deadline!) with 50,014 words.
and i'll try to blog about other stuff besides "baby" as i'm sure you are bound to get sick of hearing it but it's hard as that is my life now
1tbsp agave nectar
Sometimes the familiarity of the well worn path makes it harder for us to see what’s changing around us. And even if we do see changes, we have to choose to adapt to them. One element that makes it difficult for us to easily embrace change is the time involved in learning new ways of doing things.
Years ago, when the U.S.S.R. suddenly disappeared, there was great celebration and proclamations of how things would be better. I wondered how anyone could come up with this opinions, since it was only a few months before that there were thousands of warheads pointed at the United States by these fine people and the constant reminder we weren't friends.
It may not be the most traditional of mission statements but it's definatly something I want to work towards this year and something for me to live by and pass down to the boys.
In 2000 the eyes of the world turned to the Mansion when Texas Governor George W. Bush was elected President. As you’ll recall, it took several weeks to ascertain whether or not Bush actually won the election, but when the matter was decided, more or less, Bush turned the house over to his successor, the first Aggie-American Governor of Texas, the pretty boy with the professional skateboarder’s name and impervious helmet of hair, Rick Perry, who lives there still.
Many believe that if this been a mere condemnation of homosexuals, the writer would undoubtedly have used clearer language.
Which is perhaps why I wasn't so much a fan of the novel Faithful Place. This was an Amazon recommendation, and I do like mysteries along the lines of Dan Brown and Agatha Christie, so I thought, why not try this one. It's about a police officer who hasn't had contact with his family for about 20 years when he was supposed to elope with his girlfriend, but she never showed and so he ran away on his own. His girlfriend's suitcase is found, and soon after her body, and he's drawn back into the world of lower class Dublin while trying to solve this case. The story was sort of interesting, but I had it figured out about half way through the book, and the way it was written wasn't terribly interesting. I'll give it a half recommendation, if this is your kind of book.
This is the 3rd week of day shift and I am nursing Day 4 of this horrid cold/flu/headcold, whatever you want to call it. I made a massive mistake of not increasing the intake of vitamins with the 'timezone switch'. So there, I am properly sick for the first time in 2 years. Hence, I dedicated my morning/afternoon/day really, into changing my layout. What do you think? I am quite happy with how the owls turned out. Hoot!
I really need all of you to come help me paint. THANK you so much :D I appreciate it - really I do. ^^
From the outside, it looks like a single school, with one main door, one security guard, one principal greeting students.
The doctor ordered me
When I woke up, I got some food, then called Aunt Sue to talk about Miche. I gave her some pointers, and answered any questions that she had. We chatted for about an hour. Then, after we were done talking, Kim and I went to the Dollar Tree and to Costco. Kim wanted a membership, and I needed a few basics.
Tom Wilkinson, In the Bedroom
East Midlands RO, Geoff Dickens, opened the meeting, starting with a minute's silence for Security Team activist Dennis Scullion, who died last week, aged 47.
There are a couple of possible solutions to these DDR4 signal-integrity challenges. The first and simplest solution is to allow only one DIMM slot per DDR4 memory channel and allow only single-rank DDR4 DIMMs. The problem with this solution is that it increases the number of SoC memory channels for a given memory capacity and thus drives up the SoC’s pin count, cost, and board-level real estate.
My next step is to get exercising again. It can't be a marathon, or a run at all for that matter. I can’t do anything high impact - it must be strictly non-weight bearing or it causes flare-ups - and I can’t push myself too hard or too fast for the same reasons. I can’t afford to mask pain so I will listen to my body. I know from experience that all it takes to promote those endorphins is moderate amounts of exercise to get effects.
Woo hoo… A new post! I should be writing this in my knitting blog, but I’ve just not had any inclination to write for that blog in a long time. In total, I have three blogs now, and it’s a bit overwhelming for me right now.
Powering the globe
To get it all nice and foamy, I used my immersion blender but if you have a small milk frother then definitely go with that option.
(I know these pictures kind of make him look like a girl, but each month has a theme and April is Easter!)
In every traumatic event, there sure are people who will bear various traumas in their lifetime. Each person has a certain threshold over something. With overwhelming destruction to properties or loss of loved ones brought by natural/man-made calamities or armed conflicts, some can transcend the situation while others cannot. It basically depends on how strong the person who faces it and supplementary to that is the quality of support system he/she has. Resilience is true to all, but we exhibit it in different extents. We bounce back from a traumatic event at our own choice, at our own pace.
2. You're at a party with a bunch of friends and see a gorgeous girl.One of your friends goes up to her and pointing at you says: 'He's very rich. 'Marry him.' - That's Advertising
I remember the tenets of this conversation clear as day. We were eating dinner and he was on his second helping. I was finished and watching him eat.
The Federal Government, however, on February 15 proposed additional N656.3bn to the 2012 budget to cater for its subsidy on petrol.
Drugs which are over priced because of terrible policy for patents and over regulation that causes shortages…not to mention that Medicare will be bankrupt in only 8 years (2020)…so assuming that Julia is 3 right now then she’ll be 65 in 2074 Medicare will have been bankrupt for over 50 years, so I’m not sure how it’s paying for her prescription drugs, but Obama is just a magical being and can do anything he wants. 2074, a mere 66 years of Obama in office, Obama will also be about 110…one has to wonder how he is still cogent enough to rule with an iron fist, I’m not ruling out at this point a deal with Mephistopheles). Or to put this another way, the Congressional Budget Office projects that, assuming the economy keeps growing at a steady rate (not under it won’t) and that Medicare keeps growing at the rate it has been then right now it accounts for 2.9% of GDP, in 2020 when it goes bankrupt it will account for about 4.1% of GDP, and in 2074 it will account for about 12.8% of GDP (over 4 times the bankruptcy level).
Add the sugar, coffee, cocoa, liquor and vanilla and mix well, until all th ingredients are combined.
I wrote two full pages of this.
Whomever God calls….he prepares. I read an excerpt from a book “Apostolic Foundations” written by the late Art Katz. In the chapter on “Priestliness”, Art describes the preparation that Aaron and his sons went through to be made ready for priestly service in the Temple; God used Moses to prepare Aaron and his sons and God spoke every single detail to Moses….which is what God does. He leaves nothing undone.
It’s not hard to find controversy in this day and age, and the onset of the Christmas season is no exception. The battle has waged for a few years now, over the change in how we greet one another during this season. Season’s Greetings has been an accepted line over the years, although the obvious reference was that it meant the Christmas season. Now, in the age of political correctness and inclusiveness, the very word Christmas has become the antithesis, for some reason, to a universal greeting. It would even appear that the center point of the phrase Merry Christmas, is now being rejected for something less specific.
Congratulations to you all :)
+Survival Mode
In response to the deaths of young people who have died as a results of persistent cyber-bullying, Vicki Abadesco and her team at Soul Shoppe are on a mission to create a bully-free world and that means standing for safe, happy and loving elementary schools for all students.
Some people love white walls.
I guess I can add it to the very small pile
2.Answer the questions the “tagger” listed for you in their post, (And create 11 new questions for the people you tag to answer).
And no photograph is ever the same. That’s how it should always be. Evolving and changing, no two of the same images. It is our own perception that helps us as image makers to become as different as the other.
“You drew my attention yesterday morning with the cat face on.” he said, like stating a truth he was holding in himself.
Howdy all! This is my second post today, if you're here for Suzanne's birthday hop keep scrolling down or click HERE.
I love corn dogs…. OOOHHH Man, do I love corn dogs. I can barely stand walking by a Hot Dog on a Stick stand without feeling a little piece of me die knowing I shouldn’t be eating corn dogs on Weight Watchers. But you know what made me feel all warm and fuzzy inside today? Rebecca brought me a re-heated mini corn dog from her dinner last night at Cheesecake Factory. Even re-heated it was delicious. Without even thinking twice about it, I started looking up how to make a corn dog, but figured, I better make them mini for “points value purposes.” I totally rocked my own socks off with this recipe.
"Some of us," my student said, "are transitioning from middle to middle. A sea of endless middles. And endless possibilities. Gender doesn't define us. Only love does."
II. THE PALESTINIAN COVENANT
And with one tilt of my head, we would kiss, right in front of my entire math class.
Ether to ether was a dark holes submission of matter and energy
I would like to say this again, this is not a conspiracy site, and hence what we post is only pure hard evidence, that is uncut. Now you may delete this post from fb soon, quite similar to how the government was attacking Malaysiakini using DDOS and hijacking the entire nations Twitter traffic on the 28th April, but the evidence remains the same.
Firstly, thankyou Taryn Browning for providing me with a copy for review! This has not affected my review in any way.
On the nose - Zingy gooseberry hops, subtle biscuit malts.
Bersih accused the Election Commission (EC) today of failing to investigate 3.1 million voters whose identity card (IC) addresses differ from that in the electoral roll despite having the information since 2002.
"I like the word "indolence." It makes my laziness seem classy."
There’s something mesmerizing about the glow from a Christmas tree. It calms me, makes me pause and give thanks, and makes me feel all gooey inside. :)
Of course, any excuse to give Bruce Boxleitner work is good in my book.
Rosie, of course, has worked with Bill Rogers for years and is as fine a human being as has ever walked the earth.
My mother frowned but said nothing, a hand still holding tightly to my shoulder as she surveyed the suitcase on the floor, the airline ticket stubs on the nightstand. "You've had a long day. Now you should just rest."
It was Jacob's "hopsital" as Hope so adorably calls it. Jacob is getting out next week! He is doing awesome and they are ready for me to come and get him!
1133 **D-IV/1/1992. “In the Service of the Best Legal Education in the United States.” Prelude, Law School Great Books Program Lecture, The School of Law, Loyola University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (Incorporated in Item C-1998(2), above, pp. 724-26.) See Item C-1997(9), above, pp. 136-38.
The Belmont Station Beer Forum reports that there will be a Fresh Hop Beer "Tastival" next month at the NW Lucky Labrador in October. Its a fitting harvest festival for a pleasantly bitter summer. I can't believe I spent the last one drinking gin and tonic. (I'd ask to have it refunded, but you should never ask back for the gin that's drank.)
WHEN: Ongoing
‘The 66 House Republicans who voted “no” last Aug. 1 to the Budget Control Act, seem to have more of a lock on Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) than the 174 who said “yes.” And to keep these conservatives in the fold, the speaker has walked away from the August agreements on appropriations targets for the coming fiscal year’.
Today was officially a Pajama Day in the Hopper household. It all started off very unintentionally. You get up, eat breakfast, start a task, check your email then before you know it, it is 2:27 pm. You eat lunch. At this point you are not leaving the house, so why not continue on in your pajamas? For about a half hour I was feeling really cranky that I never showered or got out of my sweatpants. I loathed my lack of accomplishment but finally surrendered to the fact that today was just one of those days and I should enjoy it. For tomorrow, we work!
No, like most other people, their teens and early twenties were the age when most drink enthusiasts were only dimly aware of spirits. Hard liquor was likely something you knew only from advertisements, your parents' liquor cabinet, or whispered, cautionary tales of how somebody's brother got completely wasted that one time drinking way too much (insert liquor brand here).
But fighting all alone
With Photoshop, putting together an HDR image is as easy as:
Stand back and look! Look to the word. Because in all its power, in all those visitations and visions we will never find this process defined for us in the bible. We will never find an example or story or teaching that requires us to visit our past or find a root for our troubles.
So, that was lesson number one. For me. But school wasn't over. There was more to learn...
I've slowed down to about one post a week, but it's a pace I'm really comfortable with right now and I couldn't imagine not having this blog to post on at all!
One thing down, just a few more to go. Sorry about it being crooked. I had to use a bit of tape and snap the picture before it fell off my brick wall. LOL
Supposedly only available at the brewery's tasting café and its two brew-pubs in Mons and Louvain-la-Neuve, but in all honesty I picked up my two bottles at a well-stocked Delhaize supermarket branch in Antwerpen for the price of 14 Euro each.
to Saint Jo, turns her back on the east
Check For Leaks – Conserve Water And Save Money
Senza ponti, cattive campane,
For everyone else who loves Ryan Gosling and doesn’t have a weiner and doesn’t have the luxury of actually protesting outside Peopla Magazine’s headquarters, please feel free to post this all over your Bookface and Twatter:
Nobody beat us
whether we have felt alone or fulfilled,
Nah, this is Macy, mind. And from what she tells me this other guy disnae even know her real name.
A few of these are items I'm trying to finish off, but ended up liking more than I had figured, and a few are items I've been using for months, but never got around to featuring.
I can actually illustrate this one with a video!
The entire hillside was spotted with deer, which stood out boldly against the fresh snow. Literally, every square centimeter of my viewfinder was filled with deer. I was mesmerized by the sight and stopped counting to take pictures to document this most unusual scene.
If only I had more clothes.
I was at a dance intensive, with classes taught by the masters, casting auditions, and of course, a giant finale show at the end. This program was by audition (they only select 50 people from the US and Canada) so it was quite intense.
The scenery behind the bench completes the stage set. Two foliage clad houses, with arms of thick ivy stretching across the road, slowly turning the mineral vegetable.
“Of all the habits and dispositions which lead to political prosperity, religion and morality are indispensable supports. In vain would that man claim the tribute of patriotism who should labor to subvert these great pillars.” — George Washington
Day 12 down! Not many more to go!
The lack of attention I had given to my gardening had allowed the boundary between path and wall to become a little overgrown - defined by the increasingly strong growth of wild things. The less attention we give to our own edges, boundaries and borders the more difficult it will be for us to break free of them.
Dane DeHaan is the centre of the story, as the bullied and abused teen Andrew. The one who embraces his powers the most; he’s also the most damaged and is the one who ultimately has to face his demons. For all the darkness in the character, he also manages to show the joy of a teenager finding friends and a meaning to his life. Alex Russell plays Matt, cousin to Andrew and someone who’s pulled away from the social circles of school. Ostracising himself he is trying to find a human connection, but thanks to isolation he has trouble. Finally Michael B Jordan plays Steve, the all star of the group. Over achiever, looking to get into politics, social butterfly, his life has purpose, but with the power he finally is given something that gives him a great sense of joy. Fun without worry, freedom with limits. All three represent a perfect trio, and the actors are believable. Every step of the way I was with them, feeling every emotional turn.
OSHA statistics show BP ran up 760 “egregious, willful” safety violations, while Sunoco and Conoco-Phillips each had eight, Citgo had two and Exxon had one comparable citation.
I really love them all you know.
Hey, Ed Gillepsie: shut your pie-hole.
- 1 1/2 cups spelt flour (720 cal)
In the morning - 90mins before we go to work. Don’t speak to us about anything, because we are getting our heads into work mode.
So why doesn’t God step in and put a stop to all of this in judgment? Well, He will but not until this age of grace has run its course. Souls are still being saved in spite of the wickedness of man. God’s grace is still active. We see in 2 Corinthians 6:2 that “Now is the accepted time; behold now is the day of salvation.”
We want to see cards and work for Mum's! The only stipulation the challenge has is no back linking to work already posted - only new work to be linked please.
"Uh, ya sure no problem" I said taken back by the sheer size of this young man.
2/2—Reading; Shohat and Stam, “Stereotype, Realism and the Struggle over Representation” (CV 801-820)
“You promised me you were going swimming after breakfast.”
Deadline: February 2nd
10.France 54
This is a tiny little bar/pub with a huge array of beers, including many Thornbridge ales, which, as a Sheffielder, was pleasing to see. Watch out though as beer snobbery is rife here, to the point that when I complained that my wine glass smelt of antiseptic the bartender wouldn't smell it, claiming that he 'knew nothing about wine'. What-e-ver! He changed it anyway. Gav enjoyed a half of something with a stupid alcohol content and we both enjoyed sitting outside watching the buses come and go from the bus station. It was what it was, a watering hole and as I'm not a beer fanatic I didn't fully appreciate it, although I am thinking that it's probably about time I got into this real ale lark...
Voices from your past fade after a while, but just the slightest little thing can bring them back. I'm sure everyone has remnants of a long lost voice singing somewhere in their soul. I hope the voices in your head and in your past are as pleasant as mine.
Come join me -- & several hundred others -- Saturday morning, November 19th, at 9 A.M. in Memphis. You can run, walk or just cheer everyone trying to help out some sweet, helpless kitties.
And hope will lull those foes to rest."
backyard barbecues,
The envelope liner was a little more challenging since the card and envelope weren't a standard size. However I watched Gina's video and modified.
BUT, having said that, I’m getting tired of seeing/hearing people saying that “Big is beautiful”! It’s not! It’s not that is ugly either, but seriously, being over weight is NOT a good thing, sorry, but if you care about your health, if you want to be around for your kids, then you should take care of yourself!
Riva turned her back to the doorway and stepped closer to us. “As you well know, a Beboodle is a sin eater, and if there is only evil in a person, it will consume the whole spirit of that person. Usually, though, you never know the Beboodle is working because life is full of small irritations and the Beboodle just ferrets the negative energy away without your ever realizing it. But…remember this…Even the most black-hearted people have relatives who love them — mothers, fathers, siblings. Not everyone is delighted that evil can be destroyed. When my mother was attacked? The mayor’s son disappeared. No one has heard from him since. That young man was through and through bad. Everyone in town was glad he was gone, except for his family. They adored him. Watch your step, ladies.”
2. Authors that know how to tell a story
human children, just life
I wrote in my previous article that the current Browns front office had never taken a quarterback in the first round of a draft, and I believed that streak would continue with our second first round pick at 22. I was aware of the Browns interest in Oklahoma State quarterback Brandon Weeden, but I believed if he was taken, it would have been with the Browns second round pick at 37. Some speculated he would still be available, but with Brandon being the next best quarterback on the board, and the NFL being a quarterback driven league, the Browns did not want to risk losing him.
The contagion of Wukan appears to have spread to the south and west, across the border into Vietnam.
Happy Living…
In the outdoors, as in most areas of life, there's a balance. I don't want to wear tweed and plus-fours, but neither do I want to be one of those prats who've 'all the gear but no idea'. A little fashion is fine, but function is more important. The same goes for equipment - a map, a rucksack and a good picnic; that's enough on most days. Because most important of all, it is the getting out there in the first place .
Shu Uemura Lash Curler: All you need to do is read the reviews for this. It is almost everyone's favourite. It creates soft and natural curves to the lashes -- but not crimped. It's pricey, but it's not something you need to repurchase often, so it's worth it.
The only real reason why I’ve mentioned Dr Verwoerd in this posting, is to emphasize how long the Masters of Darkness have been controlling world affairs behind the scenes.
In 2003 the UK Department for Culture, Media and Sport announced a proposal to award the Byker Estate, of which the Wall forms a part, a Grade II listed rating as an example of outstanding architecture. In 2007 the Estate became a grade II* listed building (grade two star).
'Oh, MUMMY, Daddy has said he is SORRY and that means it's OVER,' quotes Youngest, in world-weary tones. The quote is from his Mother. Who is so wise about other people's arguments and such a child over her own.
24/7 anti-White output, ALL pro-white output censored in the MSM as “hate”
He stood over the girl who was trying to make this calculation,chipping in with the odd sarcastic 'is there a problem???'
To the Person who swapped a pair of bikini cut briefs for grandma panties in the 5 pack (of larger than normal, thanks for asking) I bought this week at Target,
My how things change. I still can't quite fathom taking a cruise or a bus tour of Europe with 5 cities in 10 days. But I've changed my mind about guides. A really good guide, one who is informed and has a talent for storytelling, can make a huge difference in your experience of places unknown.
The first woman accidentally steps on one.
The book is an illustrated gift book of romantic verse, in German,
I have a personal relationship with the Lord. I often go to him in prayer, asking him to forgive my sins. Why would I need a priest to get in the way?
Today will mark the first time I have featured a guest blogger. I could not have asked for a better one. Alton Higgins is the Chairman of the Texas Bigfoot Research Conservancy, a college professor of Biology, wildlife biologist, and a noted birder. He is also my good friend.
to guide you on making your pages. Kathi was also
That sounds good! So I did the most natural thing in the world and downloaded Law School for Dummies off the internet.
Internet Millionaire Secret #3: Search for and grab untapped markets. Seek out people that have not been able to have access to your product in the past. In untapped markets, you don’t have to deal with competitors which helps keep the marketing costs down. In addition, you will be able to establish a rapport and trust with your customers.
England: I said calves and pigs deliver stillborn babies all the time so why not women who are mainly a different type of livestock.
Note: keep all the ingredients ice cold.
I love all you guys. Thanks for the support and I'll see you hopefully in about a week with some wedding pictures.
Like attracts like. Light attracts Light. And that’s pretty simple!
The Winter Men #1 – 5
The Last Echo by Kimberly Derting
So until today i had totally forgotten about one partcular benefit of having The Body Shop's Love Your Body Membership card - Love Your Body - The Body Shop
The orange owl is from South America and is supposed to be good luck. A good, well-traveled friend gave it to me and I keep it over the ashes of Caj and Miska.
designers for Wildfox Couture
TODAY.com reported in February, that Nestle was going to be making Girl Scout candy bars. The wait is almost over.
Video: The Migron story A new “crisis of Zionism” every decade Allen West gets it right again Overnight music video: Passover Rhapsody, a Jewish rock opera State Department regards Israel and Jerusalem as separate entities Park Slope BDS defeated/Buy Israeli Goods Official anti-Israel events at Columbia Law School HILARIOUS (& Sad) VIDEO: America’s Future Women are Dumber Than Ever US Ambassador visits Mea Shearim before Passover (video) Irony alert: Beinart appearance in Berkeley canceled, Jewish Voice for Peace charges ‘McCarthyism’ Paris: ‘Brave’ jihadi ‘youth’ beat up 12-year old boy AvitalLeibovich: This morning I’m attending the annual women’s day event in the #IDF. More than 90% of the positions in #IDF are opened for women. #respect PA TV broadcasts clip calling Jews a “disease” Map at memorial erases Israel PA TV broadcasts clip erasing Jewish presence and history in the land of Israel BDS’ers lose in Brooklyn Те, кто остался в живых, История Сергея Сушона by yadvashemrussian idfonline: בשעה 11:05 יקיים פיקוד העורף ניסוי צפירה ביישובים מודיעין-מכבים-רעות, מודיעין עלית, אלעד, ראש העין, בית דגן, שוהם ונמל התעופה “בן גוריון” idfonline: כמו כן תישמע צפירה במועצות האזוריות הבאות: חבל מודיעין, מטה בנימין, גזר, דרום השרון ועמק לוד. ייתכן ותישמע צפירה ביישובים הסמוכים US to fund Israeli dependence on Iron Dome “One of America’s closest allies” (video) Guardian Gives Platform to Promote Terrorist-Organized “Global March to Jerusalem” ‘Tis the season for deja vu all over again in Egypt Катар делит арабский мир по заказу США Fatah/Hamas reconciliation efforts at a standstill. What will happen next? The Middle East Sampler 3/28/2012: The Media’s Selective Support Of Israeli Democracy There is one and only one effective answer to terror “Jewish Voice for Peace” suddenly cares about free speech IAF trains emergency medical care and rescue forces British MP receives death threats for defending Israel Soccer Dad’s Middle East Media Sampler Arlene Kushner On Israel’s Barukh Binah’s Lecture Of J Street 26,211 tons of goods enter the Gaza Strip
"Tell me one last thing," said Harry. "Is this real? Or has this been happening inside my head?""Of course it is happening inside your head, Harry, but why on earth should that mean that it is not real?" ~J.K. Rowling
But my friend. THis is your first 12 week challenge. Mish doesnt expect you to be doing he exercise program in a huge way yet. She doesnt even expect you to diet yet (although starting to eat healthier and starting to move a little will make it easier on you later)
~ For their birthdays they got leap pads. Depending on the moment they call it, their iPod, computer, or phone. Kids these days and their technology.
Ecovillages
But dumb till that dread day when Orc assay’d his fierce embrace.
So much for normal.
As soon as she arrives, Gail clashes with Diana, the leader of the school’s most powerful clique. The Winged make Gail’s life hell until she find allies: her airhead roommate; a cowardly fellow victim of the Winged; and, bit by bit, Diana’s boyfriend–the seemingly heartless Nick.
"Both oligarch and tyrant mistrust the people, and therefore deprive them of arms." - Aristotle
From Here to Eternity (1953)
25If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.
Directed By: Joseph Barbera, William Hanna
That she seems to concede. The media never picked this up and, when it was brought to their attention, never commented on it. This tells you two things: First, moral outrage is not some uncontrollable force, it is a conscious decision. And, second, the media is capable of reasoned judgement too because it makes much sense to hold your tongue when your entire case has been pulled from under you by the poster child for your cause.
But there is one thing about the device I DO NOT like, at all, period, end of story.
So there you have it. By no means perfect, but at least not embarrassing. How's that for aspiration? :)
On May 24, 2010 Russ and I had our 8th anniversary and true to form the day turned out to be a bust.
Hi folks, here's a cheery project combining the Lace Fragments stamp plate and the Haberdashery stamp plate. I used a colour palette of Spun Sugar Distress Ink and Paris Dusk Memento Ink, a very unusual combination for me!
So I am on a quest for my family's stories. I have started writing to aunts and uncles and have asked them to write/type/record stories that they remember about their grandparents. I hope to weave these stories together with a little book my grandmother Helen Shannon wrote about 25 years ago called "A Western Love Affair" about her and Grandpa Cecil's lives in New Mexico and Colorado. Perhaps I can give a bit of honor to their memories and gather up a bit of our history.
"dictatorship of the financial markets and the troika: EU, ECB and IMF, who have imposed austerity measures and a non-elected government on the Greek people."
Ahead of the visit of Chelsea to The Emirates this weekend, the news is quite mixed. Seeking equilibrium on scales is not going to work with Abou Diaby‘s 45 minutes of action in a friendly against Oman not balancing out fears over Mikel Arteta’s season being over, by a long shot. Or lead weight, whichever you prefer.
But then have we come to think of what would be the things that we may miss when all can be done online? Surely we all want our lives to be hassle free; we want to be able to make more of our time and it can be possible if we get to accomplish our obligations without the need to spend more time and resources. With less investment on our part such as time, money and energy we are able to make more for less. The use of computer and the internet has amazingly made it possible. Such as what was mentioned earlier about the snail mail to e-mail. Before, it took days to receive a letter from someone we knew and we had to wait days to get a response to our mail. But now with e-mail and chat features it just takes a second to send a missive and as short as seconds also to get a response depending on how fast the recipient can encode his/her message. It gets even more sophisticated now because video chat has been developed and is now used widely. We need not have to waste our time doing drafts from scratch papers and then re-writing it on a nice and clean paper, enclosing it in an envelope, then go to the nearest post office to buy stamps to send to the recipient. With the communication technology you don’t have to spend a lot of time and money from writing to sending, you can do it all with so little time and cost at your convenience. However, though technology has been so helpful, many who had experience with the traditional way of writing a letter find something valuable in the previous way of sending a letter. They say that hand written letters appears to be more personalized and thoughtful since it was personally hand written by the sender allotting time and effort as much as thoughts in making the missive hence it also serves as a strong, tangible proof of the sender’s thoughts and intents to the recipient.
These three repetitive things everyday – weekends included – are good habits that, I feel, allow me to achieve excellence, not only in my business but in my social life.
I first became aware of Jim Garrow's story in March 2008, after an article was published in a Canadian magazine giving the basic elements of his story. In June 2008, I decided to speak to the man personally and called him at his home in Ontario and asked him to go into the details of his work in more depth. My intent was to publish the interviews in June 2008, but I was asked to hold off, because there was a Canadian investigation into Garrow's claims of infant smuggling, and did not wish him to become cautious. I finally decided to post the interviews to my blog after the GuelphMercury article was published in August 2010 confirming the investigation. One can listen to our Garrow interviews here.
Mexico’s defense secretary has conceded errors in the country’s drug war, in one of the more frank assertions from the government as it wages a military-led campaign against violent traffickers.
Chris Petrella (REP) 0.62% 22
I present to you, the SUMMER SEWING CONTEST!
Spearheaded by nine year 9 students from Centralian Middle School in Alice Springs, the students are putting out a call for second hand boots suitable for children and teenagers.
If anyone has been reading my blog, they know that Ty and I moved to Bellingham just voer a week ago. You also might know that living in Portland was difficult for us. But you might not realize that difficult does not even begin to touch on it.
Previously I wrote during my train commute but since I stopped commuting by train I found it hard to get into a proper writing routine with all the bustle of home life, the distractions and the chores etc. whether it was in the morning or the evening. Then I tried the balcony (which only works in good weather by the way) to get me “out of the house” without being out of the house and found that it was much too cold even on balmy days due to the wind (unless I am in a bad mood and going for the me against the world attitude).
Here is a close-up of the heart before hand.
Meanwhile, crony capitalism - birthed by the creation of the Federal Reserve and exploited by career politicians and their financial counterparts- made significant inroads over the last few decades, exacerbating pre-existing societal divides. A “perfect storm” is now brewing.
Meals:
It is as near a universal beer as I know and I have yet to encounter a beer drinker who doesn't like it. And even a few who "don't like beer" like Black Butte.
Despite his fondness for booze and cigars, vices he had to give up upon retirement, Cheetah was not a temperamental actor. Still, he wasn’t above hurling poop (his own) at anyone who caused him grief.
Described in those terms, it looks a little nuts. Well, frankly, I have no idea what it looks like to others, but to me, that profile describes something I wouldn’t personally be signing up for, if I had the choice.
“You pushed her.”
6. Once it’s doubled in size, sprinkle the dough with flour, flour hands, and cut in two with a sharp knife on a floured board. “Cloak” each loaf by holding in one hand and tucking the overhanging dough to the bottom a few times.
04.Consume Of Sorrow Defiled (03:27)
Also useful is recycling your as-yet unprinted interview answers.
I'll leave you with some music from Gaelic Storm today.
too busy searching for the better things in Life!
So . . . the Christmas weekend is here!! Are you excited? MP let slip (he loves that!) that he has a couple of presents to put under the tree, and I'm all flustered in my eagerness for the fun morning to get here. Presents! I don't know about you, but I love wrapped things. I'm not one for big presents at all--I enjoy my Christmas best when the gifts are laid back and whimsical--but I certainly love ripping into things. And I wonder what he'll think about his gift!
“I am opening that door, officer, because I can do that. I am not a little girl….”
Stronger: Well, the work out ball got dropped this week (forgive the pun). I was only able to work out twice this week. Not true....I could have worked out more, I just didn't. Which means that I could have burned more calories, but I didn't......moving on......
Then reality hit.............i was really gonna do it.......the same thing i do every year yet always seems such a huge task....
And Dineocrat comments:
Here’s the formula that led to this lesson: I’ve been wanting to try a Jigsaw all year + end of Similarity unit where we talk about interesting real-world problems + group whiteboards + day after modeling/discussing problems as a class = Expert Groups (which isn’t actually anything super innovative – I’ve seen this idea in writings on group dynamics before)
I’m justice wrapped in a plastic bag pressed against a whores ass
I am a writer, speaker and book mentor who took a long path to publication. Ten years spent in obscurity. Years and miles of unpublished words. I‘m the poster child for Malcolm Gladwell’s Outliers, where he shares the secret of “genius.” (Here’s the unglamorous truth: Genius comes from 10,000 hours of practice.) So I wrote my 10,000 hours, then started finding success in small venues–regional magazines, a local paper, then national magazines. Be sure to visit Mary on her blog www.MaryDeMuth.com
With my acquiescence's, my silence, and the obedience which would never be enough.....
There is a happy ending to our story. What Daphanie didn't know was that the boy at the end of the third row was also a sufferer of GumB. Minutes before their demonstration, they both gelled up with the toothpaste of their choice. At twelve past two in the afternoon they were called to the front of the class. One stood on Sister Mary Elizabeth's right and the other on her left. On Sister Mary's signal their hands found each other.
If you came from the kitchen I would kiss the cook but you’re sent from Heaven so I’ll kiss the Maker.
Leftside ft Syon - Nuh Other Girl
Okay, there’s an extra Sloughi up there, but — my goodness. I can’t even count them properly, let alone photograph them. I think anytime the number of dogs you’re trying to capture within a frame increases beyond three, the difficulty of getting a good shot increases exponentially. These guys in particular move with such delicacy and speed, they really expose me for the amateur dog photographer that I am.
San Francisco, California
In 2001, Kellogg’s finally realised their combination of ignorance and arrogance had led to dismal failure in India. They realised that they were not going to change the Indian consumers’ age old eating habits, in one short decade, and that they needed to change their strategy to succeed in India.
Language Log is always totally fascinating. Today, Victor Mair's admirably informative post about linguistic aspects of the politics of Hong Kong - a subject I would never otherwise have heard anything about - contains the following aside:
Dulltown, Europe: Today’s dictionary word is ‘plus-fours’ – baggy knickerbockers.
More impressions of Jesus Lizard:
This was an event organised by the AMICIgar club of Naples and Avellino, in Italy. For the non-italians amongst you, the name of the club is a play on the words "amici" (friends") and cigar... The event was in Pozzuoli, by Naples, in Villa Habiba on 17th and 18th June. It was truly an amazing weekend, filled with great cigars, awesome food and fantastic people!
EDIT: Shortly after posting this I removed the Horrorclix figures rocket launcher and replaced it with an MP5A SMG. He looks much more like a SWAT Trooper now.
he leads me beside peaceful streams
The story goes on to tell of him working through recent pain in his marriage and bring reconciliation with his wife, but I just thought that bit was really amazing!
So begins the story of Yoshi and Treeko. I have to admit that they are two of the cutest little creatures I have ever owned. And I have owned some cute buggars. (Hamsters, Felines, Pooches and so on)
Hi my crafty ladies!!! Today is challenge time at Cooking with Cricut!!! the theme is Easter!!! I love this theme because is so colourful!!! Please join us and check all the Design Teams creation, they are adorable!!!
“The common themes raised from tenants were that they were experiencing draughts through windows and doors, fuel bills were too high and issues around condensation, damp and mould. Quite often they have not opened windows or turned extractors on whilst washing or cooking, and no fresh air is getting in. The majority of the properties were found to have background ventilation such as trickle ventilators fitted to UPVC window frames and air bricks but they were sealed or blocked up by tenants, which means moist/damp air cannot escape.
“I wasn’t always abnormal. In fact, in 1997, I was the picture of social normalcy. Repuplicans would’ve been proud of me. It was 1997 of course that my one man band Disorderly Cows enjoyed our(my) short-lived but inspirational and highly influential career. I created an awful form of music that I called Moo Grind. Armed with a shitty guitar with two broken strings, a horrid guitar amp and pedal, a kazoo, and my lovely voice, I unleashed the cassette “Bovine Intervention” upon the world. Mixing serious songs, like the introspective “Pain Factor Denied” and “Serene Brutality” with an anthem-esque punkish tune “Oppressed Working Class”, the real life day-to-day tales of cowmanship “Sit At Leo’s and Rot” and “Bovine Intervention”, the fuck-you-I’m-gonna-rock-somewhat “Fucking Docile”, “Moo Grind (Fuck You I’m Disorderly)” and “Immolate Me Baby”, and of course the Spice Girls cover “Wannabe”, I was pretty sure I was onto something huge. Most likely I was ON something huge though, no doubt my favorite things that year were Jack Daniel’s and LSD. The cover of the album was a poorly hand drawn parody of Exhorder’s “Slaughter In The Vatican” album. Are there slaughterhouses in Vatican City? I don’t fuckin’ know. I do know that if the world heard the music that was on this cassette, I’d probably be committed… or commended, definitely one or the other.”
When my trainer first walked in, first thing out of his mouth "you look smaller!" I frowned. Not a good thing. I lost of a veritable shitton of muscle, and it sucks. Boo. Smaller is not always better. I have different goals than that.
I KNOW!
Think about the people in films and magazines and on the internet who pose naked. They are appealing to the sin of lust. There is a market for it. People are lustful – they want to see that kind of thing. But people aren’t naturally inclined to go around naked. The world entices them into doing it to make money. Then a cult develops – you are “told” that attractive people get famous by doing it, so, if you are attractive, people will really like you if you do it, too, or, if that’s too much for you, then the world tells you that it is alright to at least act promiscuously for the same purpose.
Anyway, all of that to explain why I'm posting another recipe.
We do a lot of things as humans unconsciously but i don’t think following people is one of them as it’s not an automated action there must be some conscious process we go through to select who we follow or not.
Maybe I'm just partial to the regional breweries (Great Lakes, Bell's, etc.), but I really haven't tasted a beer that I didn't enjoy from Bell's. I will be looking to add a few of their brews to my list after we get through the next few months before the wedding.
I enjoy spending time with my guides but, I especially like this one. I call him my teacher. He has very little to say yet, his messages are always powerful. His words resonated deep into my soul.
I'm home right now sick with a bad case of food poisoning. Spent last night throwing up in a bucket next to my bed every 20 minutes or so because I was too weak to walk to the bathroom and definitely too weak to drive myself to the clinic. I NEVER FELT MORE ALONE!!
As a Vet, I was honored, I'll say!
Finally got these babies shipped to me by the Theory store in San Francisco. Sort of reminds me of Céline Resort and these Calvin Klein ads with Lara Stone where she's wearing white orthopedic shoes (but they're perfect). Buying shoes is kind of a big deal for me.
1. Roster has 9 spots left. 10 picks + any cheap free agents from now until training camp.
* Dr Michael Jones, Course Director, MA Music Industry Studies, Institute of Popular Music, University of Liverpool: “Music and The Legal System”;
And our small circle closed in tightly around Stephanie's belly, lifting her up in prayer, in song, in laughter, and in silliness.
On the program, Jo Jung Suk, who plays the captain of the royal guards to King Lee Jae Ha (played by Lee Seung Gi) was asked who seems to have gotten the short end of the stick between Ha Ji Won and Lee Seung Gi and he answered, “I am a crazy fan of Ha Ji Won, but aren’t I serving Lee Seung Gi? Lee Seung Gi got the short end of the stick.”
Just look around your office room. Are you able to find the things you want in a jiffy? What about the paper clips and staplers?
Promarkers used:
This drawing reminds me of my "carbs" drawing (#52), but better. :) I also switched back to the brown paper journal.
So recently I have decided that I don’t just want this blog to be about my everyday life, or the food that I cook or the pictures I take. Sure that is all find and dandy but I do have a brain in my head and I have a lot of things that I think about that I would really like to be able to share with the world, why? Because since I find them important or interesting there might be other people out there who do also and what better way to find kindred spirits than to write about everything little thing. So that will be what I am going to start doing, don’t worry I’ll still share my recipes and daily life stories but now there is going to be more to this!
It seems that only goes for illegal aliens. That is all they help. Refugees they called them. They told me to walk up the street to a church and they should be able to help me. So I do. They tell me that they have no money. I told the woman I was looking for money, I was looking for a doctor who can give me something so I can't stop going to the bathroom every ten minutes and stinging like crazy when I do. She said they can't help me. I asked do they have names of doctors for illegals? I didn't wait for a response.
The thing is, I always know what decision I really want to make, but I just don’t like disappointing people. And I’m one of those people that always assumes they make the wrong decision. I suppose it’s one of those “the grass is greener on the other side” kind of deals.
The Condomerie doesn’t only sell novelty condoms but also custom-fit ones. Someone will actually measure your erect penis and tell you your size, because men wearing ill-fitting condoms is as prevalent a problem as women wearing ill-fitting bras. (Except one could end up in a lifelong commitment and the other just makes your back ache for a bit.)
Well I hadn’t noticed but the people really noticed that they didn’t really want us around,
Cravings I couldn't resist: Beer!
Week 7: Thursday, Oct. 18, at San Francisco, 5:00 PM
Ringer
For any questions or dj-ing enquiries fell free to contact me!!!
You are no angel and I’m no saint
Filippo Marcheggiani - guitars, vocals
The best messages to come out of my reading were that I should carry on writing, that trials are followed by triumphs and that I must hold our family’s stories from the next generation.
This book is a very assured debut, full of those dreadful moments of realisation that mark growing up: that the world isn’t at all how you thought it was, but instead is messy, unfair, uncontrollable and incomprehensibly different from your expectations. Schabas allows Georgia to speak for herself, showing how the polarisation in ways of thinking about sex is a problem rather than a solution. In this book, the feminist (and concerned family) position is akin to the position of abstinence-only education. Both think they are showing girls how not to be victims; neither understands that mild interest in sex is not the same thing as wanting to have sex, and that a lack of information and culture of extreme disapproval results in girls having sex (and babies) even when they don’t want to. The adults in this book don’t understand that Georgia’s experience of the world is incredibly limited. They don’t recognise that their morals and advice come from a position of overview and lived experience and as such cannot possibly help Georgia make real decisions.
He kept on seeking legal redress, of course. As the government notices of intent kept coming, he applied for a protection order. In 2005, though, an amendment to the Zimbabwean constitution allowed the seizure of white land without court review or compensation. He went higher then, and in 2007 sued Mr Mugabe before the tribunal of the Southern African Development Community. Though 77 other white farmers eventually joined him, he was the first and foremost: Mike Campbell v Republic of Zimbabwe. And, astonishingly, he won—though the tribunal said it would have ruled differently if his land had really been given to poor blacks, rather than the president’s cronies.
There is Yeda anna – probably the most colorful one in the group, whose life revolves around – “The humble vada pav”. He has drawn maps for people asking for directions , with waypoints as vada pav stalls. A connoisseur of this maharashtrian snack, Anna, even coaxes chefs who don’t have the vada pav in their menu to make it specially for him..
comes instead." Jeremiah 8:15
Melanie Jarocki
‘Bill Kristol of the Weekly Standard sees only one conceivable precedent for ‘Forward’: Mao. Along with a picture of Obama appearing to bow to Chinese President Hu Jin Tao, Kristol wonders, “So if ‘Forward’ is the slogan for the Obama campaign, would ‘Cultural Revolution’ be the slogan for the second term?”
Once I have my card addressed and ready to be mailed, I put it in a little note holder I have at the front door. When I leave the house, all I have to do is grab whatever mail is there and pop it in the mailbox.
But I got tougher and after freaking out when Hubby bought home The Walking Dead TV series, I actually sat and watched it with him... if by 'watched' I can count running in and out of the room several times screaming. It's now one of my favourite shows (although I still can't look most of the time) and I am addicted to the graphic novel of the same name. I even have a PINTEREST board of ZOMBIES.
The Titantron shows DiZ eating chicken and dancing lazily, all to the theme of Guile of Street Fighter fame. “I like chicken. It’s delicious. Any vegetarians are now banned. The second part of the mantra is big breast-es-ss.”
Elizabeth Abbott
BLOGGING as a way of making sense and remembering, and in the hope that some of it may be helpful, interesting and encouraging to those who read it.
She moved beside him and faced the window. "A Christmas tree? You're friggin' nuts if you think I'm going to accept this as an X-mas File case because of a Christmas tree in someone's house!"
Can't explain to you what would have happened if I had fielded that call. I think that is why P gives people his cell number now instead of the home phone. I can tell you that the laws of physics would have been broken and her head would have somehow ended up on my side of the phone.
Then laugh at how cheesy that was and high-five before actually parting ways.
1 coat Poshe
I'm in awe of some of the photos I've seen from other attendees!
We want you to have a jolly holiday season! Seven of us are offering this fabulous giveaway to help you celebrate. Enter between now and 7 p.m. U.S. Eastern time Thursday, Nov. 17 to win a package of fabulous prizes valued at $350! International entries are welcome. ONLY ONE (1) ENTRY PER PERSON, PLEASE. DUPLICATES WILL BE DELETED.
I decided to send an @ reply to Farhad. I was pleasantly surprised that he responded and seem to take a sincere interest in why I was not pleased with the image accompanying his post.
Then back home in time to get ready for couples counseling. We had to be over on the West side by 11am. We were a bit late, but still made it. It was a good session. Each day gets better and better. It's gotten good since he went back to work. I think that men need to be at work. ROLF!
That reminds me – my book is on a special offer by the way… on Amazon 77p (1.24$)
Finally his exasperated partner asked, "What is taking so long?"
This image was taken years ago, it was a time when I had a couple of days off, so I headed up to Scotland, a little place called Queens View, Loch Tummel. It’s near Pitlochry, from where I used to live, it was about a 3 hour drive.
been thinking about my favorite places. The pool I like best lies in the woods near a place called Rip Rap Hollow in the Blue Ridge Mountains. A splendid falls cascades up above, but I like the pool far more. We always meant to go back, but never have. The cold water ripped through me like liquid ice and is as clear as melted crystal.
“We were going to go as a family,” he said. “My daughter would have had her camera and everything.”
Read mammal books: Pulled out a lot of our non fiction mammal books and sat on the couch looking at them! As we were reading we talked about the features of mammals: all mammal mothers give their babies milk, most have hair, most are born live (not from a hard egg), are warm blooded, and breathe through lungs.
Rounds 6-7: Ch 3. Dc in first 8 dc. Ch 9. Skip 9 dc, dc in the 10th. Dc in each remaining dc around. Join with sl st to top ch of ch 3.
I just sort of smiled and said, “I don’t know, I guess we’ll have to wait and see.”
Oh, and let's say a word about that genie, Barani -- the
Roberta is the standby for Elphaba in the German production of Wicked: Die Hexen von Oz. I think she's awesome because she speaks 3 languages, her native Italian, German, and English. (Dude, what is it with Europeans and their amazing abilities to speak more than just their native languages? Gosh, we're so lame in America. We only speak American. Anyhow.) That's some serious talent. Plus her voice is quite excellent. =D
As time went on, the list of questions and curiosity grew and grew. I remember building up courage to ask my adoptive parents more about the adoption and more about my birth family every now and again. I liked to be reminded of the story sometimes just to try to make sense of it all in my head. It was when I reached the age of 11 or 12 and the beginning of adolescence that the real emotional roller coaster started. I got the feeling that my adoptive parents were not telling me the full story and asked to see my adoption papers.
I even got the mower out tonight and started getting it ready. I will need a new battery and some regular maintenance stuff before she is ready but I think we are good to go.
Jamie Ness, who had returned to the Rangers starting XI after a season disrupted by injury, claimed the fourth. United had been fortunate to escape a penalty claim seconds earlier as the ball struck the hand of Sean Dillon, Ness su bsequently left in plenty space to notch his first league goal.
(seen on TheBrooklynPaper.com/comments)
The next layout has a 12x6 pocket. I needed that layout on the other side; however, on this side I really wanted to use 3 horizontal photos. Therefore, I simply took a piece of kraft cardstock, stamped the tone-on-tone map image, trimmed the photos just a bit and then attached them to the cardstock. I added a bit of journaling, stickers, stamping, and a bracket border to the top for Easy Peasy embellishments.
Jonsi: No, it was cool. He's so nice to work with and a great guy in general. He mainly helped us with the recording process. He recorded us in the swimming pool and also our rehearsal space and then he mixed it in our attic in the house me and him share. He brought a lot of new arrangements to the songs and reconstructed some of the pieces that were all over the place. He helped us make sense of it all and also encouraged us to record more instruments, and for me to sing and write more lyrics. I guess you could say he played a big part in the making of the record.
Despite the fact that probably my all-time favorite children’s book is The Very Hungry Caterpillar, I despise the way caterpillars’ bodies slink. Nevermind that they usually turn into delicate butterflies, which I love. I mean, nevermind that they’re the same darn creature in either form. It doesn’t matter. With their many pairs of legs fanning their long bodies out like a wave as they clamber across the sidewalk and up the trees, I can’t help but get the willies.
Please keep praying for the general health of the team. Stomach issues are still a problem, though imodium has done the trick for several of our team members. Everybody is in good spirits. There is a great amount of cooperation among team members and we are having a blast with the kids here.
So, you might be wondering why I am calling this a foodie treat. Feast your eyes upon this perfect scene:
Emily, raising five orphaned grandchildren, had to beg among neighbours for a measly bag containing a couple of scoops of barley grain – enough to just about survive on for two days at most.
Published in the October 2004 issue of Violence Against Women, it said: "In Sweden, prostitution is officially acknowledged as a form of male sexual violence against women and children.
I'm green right now, and I'm ashamed to say it.
Even harder yet is trying to pass said contrived retrospected rock music off as the music of a generation. It's just not possible, or true. RENT is one guy's idea of what rock music from a brief geographical and historical period was like. The music of a generation is defined by variation, by themes, by adaptations, by deviations. It cant be defined by one guy writing some pretty shitty pseudo-operatic non-melodic rock music about some friends of his who got the HIV.
And were used to
Homer was a man of cardinal self-belief
As many readers of STL Hops know, I’m not a fan of big hop aroma and flavor and Belgian yeast, the combination just doesn’t work for me. But somehow Boulevard found a way to pull it off and make a wonderfully refreshing summertime beer."
she then immediately got off the phone with me because maddy had started to bleed again.
In addition to our Work Sponsors helping us out, my wife’s company’s Office of Housing, back in May, sent us a survey to determine what type of materials we would need in our house. We were asked how many children we had so they knew how many beds we need. They asked if we were bringing any furniture and any pets. The survey had plenty of other questions to determine our likes and dislikes. I thank the Office of Housing for their assistance in helping us find a house, but I would like to suggest that they add one item to their survey.
However, every year the general public neglects the things which make the world tick over a little easier. Sure, it’s a great idea to want to get fit, quit smoking, save money, kick out that good-for-nothing spouse or whatever, but what about the little cogs in the wheels of your world that need just as much attention as the big ideas? I’m talking about The Lesser Resolutions. The minor little commitments that you can make to yourself that may just be the difference between a good night’s sleep and reaching for the nearest automatic weapon next time someone pisses you off. Here are some of mine:
Tip: We highly recommend not to use openings below liquid levels when purchasing a double wall tank.
OK. So that's kind of what it's like. Putting little bits and pieces in your head and letting things perk. It's fabulous, and I hope it happens in your own head. Now my load of fabric is ready for the dryer, and I'm going to go stitch on my poncho-ette thing--got to make the test one to see what needs tweaking. I would already be in there working on it, but I kind of need some other colors of floss--these aren't colors I usually use, and the floss book shows me the perfect colors, which are, alas, colors I do not have. I could drive all the way across town, but I'm hoping that when The EGE finished running, he'll need to go to the store for something--I HATE driving all that way just for floss. Probably $1's worth of gas for $2 worth of string. Sigh.
But because you should not mulch a veggie garden we weed when we can. Just don't let the weeds choke out the good stuff!
All Magic Prose and Photos
Once I've run it through the glitter I take it out, lay it on some paper and then use the spoon to scoop up, pour & press the glitter into any blank spots. When the tape is covered I take the back of the spoon and go along the tape length pressing into the glass to grind it down onto the tape. This is especially important if you're working with real glass glitter--you don't want to press into it with your fingers, ouch!
1. Have a basic plan of attack. It doesn't have to be super detailed. In fact that will probably be another "failure" to your name as some of us are just not built for detailed plans! I have reviewed just about every type of schedule and the one that works best for me is the very basic one. I write down each room and I put how long I want to work in those rooms. Most of the time it is 15 minutes. On some days its 30 if I need to mop or do any other deep cleaning. Be sure to meal plan as part of your plan of attack! I also suggest at least one time a week cooking a double meal and freezing the second one. This will give you some easy on days where things don't go quite to plan.
This cookbook feels so much more comfortable and familiar while introducing recipes that I sure haven’t tried before. The directions are simple and don’t have you performing acrobatic feats in your kitchen. You don’t need a culinary degree to make what the author is telling you to make and I like that. This will have you eager to try new things that really aren’t too foreign and it will allow you to have such a variety of flavors in your family’s meals that no one will get a case of the “blahs” at dinner time.
Marko was promiscuous and although men are often celebrated for being a ladies’ man, Marko admits that much of his detachment to women, and sexual promiscuity were related to things that he was embattled with much of his life.
April 16– Wednesday– London, England– Ten members of the British and Foreign Anti-Slavery Society, three of them presently serving in Parliament, call upon the American Minister, Charles Francis Adams. They say to Mr Adams, “The committee view with profound sorrow the unhappy contest between the Northern and the Southern sections of the Republic. In the presence of so appalling a calamity, they can only give utterance to the fervent hope that the fratricidal conflict may soon cease, and peace be restored to the land; and that with the abolition of the true cause of strife, a common ground of union may be found, and a divided community be again joined in the bonds of brotherhood. In conclusion, the Committee would assure you, Sir. of their personal esteem and consideration, and of their very sincere desire for the welfare and the prosperity of the nation you represent.” In return, Minister Adams expresses his thanks and the reciprocal good will of the Lincoln Administration to Her Majesty’s Government and to the British people.
Cop arrested after shooting during raid
Mr Smith has either taken the last part of the paragraph verbatim from Mr Whitehouse, or else the writer possesses a very dry wit.
The discussion went to the Shia and the Sunni and the Kurds and on and on. They were the center of attention because they are destroying each other, have militias and push their way around.
True, it's technically a mess. It's randomly punctuated. The dialogue is all over the place. The characters are bipolar. The sex is vanilla. Typos abound (at one point Christian stared at Ana like "a bacon in the night" which made a weird sort of sense, actually). Ana has this really weird habit of doing figure skating jumps off gymnastics apparatuses. And it started out as fanfic, which I get the impression I'm supposed to be all up in arms about. But holy cow. Do you know the last time I read that many words in such a short period of time? Harry Potter and the Order of the Phoenix.
+ 4 cups of water
39 min: Ben Arfa runs at the Chelsea defence and tries to slip the ball through to Ba, but over-hit his pass after a fine build-up. Newcastle have been impressive so far, showing admirable enterprise and, usually, execution. “Re: your linguistic conundrum,” blurts Hugh Collins. “An American commentator recently pushed the envelope of soccer analysis by saying that Petr Cech put in a “surreal” performance in the Champions League semi. I didn’t see the game, but am imagining that Cech threw a fish at Leo Messi?” Clearly that American commentator was talking a load of carp.
So on Christmas Eve, to share our celebration with him, I emailed and Facebooked photos to Afghanistan to keep the family together. You see, the earrings and necklace below were a gift from the soldier nephew…
Cast on 30 stitches and join for knitting in the round with the magic loop technique or your DPNs.
Answer: This is a very long story, but I will try and sum it up in a few sentences. Joshua and I both reached a point in our life where we started wanted more than a fancy paycheck. We realized the old cliche of “money doesn’t bring you happiness” is true. We weren’t happy with ourselves even though we had everything society told us would make us happy. Once we realized this, we were unsure of what the important things in our lives were. Then we found minimalism. We saw it as a tool to use to help us prioritize our lives.
he hated for
He is showing you every truth
Brazil’s presidential election in October looks less risky to investors than any other in the last quarter of a century and the economy has bounced back after a brief recession due to the global financial crisis, but there are still investment risks to watch in Brazil this year.
But my cursed shy feet, stop my steps,
Sadie remembered
Heteroflexible / means they’re straight, but if you get them drunk enough you have a chance
When I question what I am doing, the pressure of learning the lines, giving up afternoons and evenings I could be spending with my wife, I just look back at that first time.
Take some Time card:
The Importance of Stack Size + Test
Pray and mean every word that comes out of your mouth.
9. Children
See, God does cause all things to work together for good.
I'd scrap this entire query and start over with the query template I've described in several other places, but bears repeating:
She stepped between the two boys and gave them both gentle kisses on their heads. First Roland and then Marley. Marley ate his slice carefully, making sure his mouth was closed whilst he chewed. Careful of his manners. Some things did not have veneers. Washington Heights certainly didn’t, the shit that you saw was the shit that you got. And this kindly old women standing at the kitchen sink, wiping dishes and softly singing to herself was no Ma Barker. Marley didn’t think she was stupid either. She had to know what her son did though he was sure she turned a blind eye to most of it. Maybe she held on to the memories of a younger and innocent Piper and covered them in plastic that protected them and her from the taint that her son had become.
each other
—from Enjoy Every Sandwich
Here, here to that! A man of convention says it, no wonder he’s one of our most forward thinkers of today!
I was quite in need of a sugary pick-me-up, so I decided to open the present that most screamed "I contain chocolate" at me.
The day following Jesus would go forth into Galilee, and findeth Philip, and saith unto him, Follow me. Now Philip was of Bethsaida, the city of Andrew and Peter. Philip findeth Nathanael, and saith unto him, We have found him, of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. And Nathanael said unto him, Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? Philip saith unto him, Come and see. Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him, and saith of him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile! Nathanael saith unto him, Whence knowest thou me? Jesus answered and said unto him, Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. Nathanael answered and saith unto him, Rabbi, thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel. Jesus answered and said unto him, Because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou? thou shalt see greater things than these. And he saith unto him, Verily, verily, I say unto you, Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man.
That was the Morgan we would come to know and love on the small screen, dryly funny and a bit sarcastic on the outside, but warm and mushy on the inside. You got more dry than warmth in his second big TV role, as Jack Webb's equally staccato partner in the late-'60s revival of Dragnet.
I'm glad that President Obama and First Lady have too much class to lower themselves down to the Palin's trashy level and attack children. In addition, the President and First Lady raised their two daughters properly and you won't hear of Malia and Sashia trying to make an unethical quick buck and pretending to be something they are not.
You know, I should really restrain myself from buying fruits all the time. I can't resist in buying lots and lots of gorgeous cherries, peaches, nectarines, apricots, mangoes, but then I'm left with all these wonderful fruits without knowing how do I have the time to play with them. I have so many varieties of fruits that I'm confused of what to make. I just finished making some healthy and tasty fruit smoothie with peach, raspberry, blueberry, and some mango, yumm... Fruit crumble using all the different summer fruits might be in the menu a few weeks from now if I ever managed to squeeze some time to make a vanilla bean ice cream. I haven't been playing too much with raspberry this year, knowing that I still have a few months to go, but not for the stone fruits, their season will be over before you know it. I already have some list of raspberry dessert I want to make, hmm cannot wait. In the next few weeks, you will find me busy buying and freezing each one of them though, for my winter stash this year. Oh how I wish they would be available all year long.
We hovered above a Greek port café,
Arrrgh, I have blogger's block. Words are not coming to me easily tonight. I think I may be getting ill. Neddy has had croup all weekend so we've had some tough nights with him coughing all through the night waking both of us up. Poor little thing. He's a tough one though. Still smiles all the time even when he's sick.
We'd love to see anything in terms of images that you would find in nature. You will have until 11:59EST on Wednesday May 18th to upload your projects using the link below. We would love you to use our images, which you can find in the store here, but it's not necessary. Please no backlinking but you can combine with other challenges.
If consumers are willing to ask questions and thoroughly research their options, they can increase their chances of getting the best possible alternative support for the difficult task of treating cancer.
their correct email addresses. Also, please be sure my mom gets a
2) Find a better resist. I ordered some pens from an electronics company that are made for this kind of thing (or rather circuit boards), I'll give that a try. I'll poke around on the Internet too for other resist media (any suggestions would be welcome). Apparently Staedtler red ink pens work better than Sharpies. Eventually I'll probably try the laser printer/toner transfer thing. Maybe. It would be nice not to have to draw anything.
We have seen extreme movement of front wings before in super slow motion, such as wing tips fluttering, wings swaying sideways on their mounting pylons and endplate devices flapping. All of these movements, although highly visible, have been accepted by the FIA because the tests have been passed. All of which is to the detriment of the overriding regulation that bodywork should be rigid and immovable.
So while Steve’s questions are worthwile, I like my questions too.
1322 D-VIII/5/1999. On Moral Character and Admission to the Bar. Talk Show, Radio Station KTXR, St. Louis, Missouri. See Item D-IV/15(B)/1999, above.
Not so for the people of Bosnia, Serbia and Croatia. Not in 1992…
a body just can't hold all this beauty.
Since myself and my 4 siblings are scattered about, we don't all get together very often at the same time. So we definitely knew if we could all make it that would be a surprise in and of itself.
My Spanish descendants come from the Basque country. I found some people in the White pages with my last name. I really want to go and see where I’m from.
Carl Sagan
A Room of One’s Own – by Virginia Woolf
I had a wee chat with Gary Smailes over at BubbleCow. I'm finding this blog ever so useful at the moment. There is a wealth of advice about how to get published on the site. Plus you can sign up for the writing gang and get a weekly newsletter, and every now and again this little box pops up where you can type in a question and Gary really answers. I can say that now, because I typed in a question and got an answer, a couple of recommendations of books to read and got a sneak peek at the soon to be revealed question and answer page.
Meltwater and the PRCA have stood alone in challenging the NLA’s licensing scheme both in the courts, and in the Copyright Tribunal, on behalf of PR agencies, in-house PR teams and all other business users of the Internet. If unchallenged, the NLA’s scheme would have increased costs not only for Meltwater customers but also for all users of commercial media monitoring services, many of whom are PRCA members ...".I have just heard from my blogging colleague Asim Singh that Associated Press is commencing proceedings against Meltwater in the United States -- so I think we can assume that this conflict has gone global.
Confession... Editor Ben loved so many of the projects in the Folk linkup but can't use many due to the quality of photography. So... please heed my advice above and practice. Maybe I'll do a quick lesson on an easy way to photograph your projects for submission... sound like a plan?
Note: If you are feeling a tightness in the outer right thigh already, stay here. Otherwise, adjust your right foot to be as close to parallel with your right knee as possible.
And the ketchup
Every year, the owners, associates and makers of Round Table pizza convene to discuss life, love and politics. Or maybe they just talk about pizza. Regardless, our company is annually tasked with conceptualizing a complete set of collateral for the roughly 200-person event. This year, an external source provided the logo, which would become the foundation for all of our designs. Had I been in creative control, I caaan’t say I’d have opted for this particular logo (or its color scheme), but life’s full of roadblocks, idn’t it? Given what was provided, I focused on the gold and blues and opted for what I like to call a “preppy, grosgrain” layout for the first piece in the series.
Later books include recipes for Polish classics: hearty casseroles, a cabbage-and-sausage stew called bigos, and golabki, or stuffed cabbage rolls. Her latest book, published this year, brings together 123 salad recipes.
Runner Up: Stockbridge Taps festival in Sept. Awesome selection
08. Jump
There's a very real chance I'll get slapped with the misogynist label but one thing we have in common, Ann, is that neither of us ever gave a fuck what people thought about us. Here's the difference:
Once more, when praising the "glimmer of hope" shone by the "brief but bright struggles of the youth and students", the statement sets up another division between that "generation" and "the comfortable futures of even their older siblings". It seems absurd to me that any working class person in the UK could be described as having a "comfortable future" ahead of them. Everyone in a job - a shrinking percentage of the population - is being made to work far harder for less (or relatively less, inflation-adjusted) reward! Where is this "comfortable future" and just who is living it?
We the People demand forgiveness of all the debt. We demand the
and that was that.
In India, over 47,000 cases of NPAFP were reported in 2011. The paralysis symptoms of NPAFP are practically the same as what’s attributed to “eradicated” wild virus polio. Apparently, vaccine polio viruses also cause polio paralysis.
When I meet a shrink that shares that perspective, I’ll let them help me out. In the mean time…no dice.
“There is no Dana, only Zuul!” Our long-awaited 6” figure of Dana Barrett as Zuul from the first Ghostbusters™ features authentic, film-accurate sculpting right down to her golden gown. And, with two interchangeable lower bodies she can stand or, when she tires of waiting for the coming of Gozer, sit on the included bench display.
Diving is of course a raw nerve with Arsenal. Robert Pires is our most celebrated culprit and was castigated nearly a decade ago for the ease of his loss of footing. The Frenchman quickly learned and enhanced his reputation with this redemption. And this is before we consider our Brazilian Croat whose career was effectively ended by ill-founded and scurrilous Uefa claims backed by the media.
They longed to draw the night sky near
Among academic associations the American Historical Association, the American Economic Association, the American Chemical Society, and the American Psychological Association were all started by members of The Order or persons close to The Order. These are key associations for the conditioning of society. The phenomenon of The Order as the FIRST on the scene is found especially among Foundations, although it appears that The Order keeps a continuing presence among Foundation Trustees… The FIRST Chairman of an influential but almost unknown organisation established in 1910 was also a member of The Order. In 1920 Theodore Marburg founded the American Society for the Judicial Settlement of Disputes, but Marburg was only President. The FIRST Chairman was member William Howard Taft. The Society was the forerunner of the League to Enforce Peace, which developed into the League of Nations concept and ultimately the United Nations.
If you fancy making yourself all depressed please feel free to read all about it here, here, here, and here. The last one is from the Daily Mail so is a little like "War for Dummies" but does at least give you a decent summary if you're not up to speed. Which wouldn't be a surprise as everyone is talking about Jimmy Saville, the XFactor and Eurobashing.
Other Half thinks we should just encourage her to tell them to fuck off. While I admire his gung-ho direct approach (and she may need it in the future) she is only 6, so maybe that won't play too well at school...
"Billy said they stick out, but I don't think so." She is still looking in the mirror, holding her hair half up and turning her head back and forth to check them out.
But I was so wrong.
1. I had my last "planning meeting" with my contractor yesterday! Which means that I have everything I need to take to the bank to get this party started. It has been SUCH a long process, this planning stage. Mostly that's my fault, because I've made a gazillion changes since the first draft. I have a super-patient contractor, though, who has yet to fire me.
Saturday we met friends to go to the RV Show. They’re shopping, and it’s so much fun to go along and look at all the goodies out there! They came home for dinner, and another couple joined us, and we ate and laughed and played cards until bed time.
Students should be held accountable for their behavior, but criminalizing misbehavior and issuing Class C misdemeanor tickets at school is not the answer. Why? It is unevenly applied, a waste of limited resources to track and prosecute these cases, and teaches students the wrong lesson.
The most important tool at your disposal is: Word of mouth. I kid you not. Just look at this example from XKCD:
So as the second prophet of the second coming of the second Jesus (don’t triple that phrase), I must inform you that you should now send your tithe to my house, (to prove your devotion), and we must increase the tithing to 15% of your net pay since in these hard times there are so many who can’t afford to pay their share. I am sure that brother Weinland wants to update this all on the COG-PKG website, but as he said in his blog, he is going to be very busy with these end time events. God told me this is his desire. In return he will be even more merciful than he already is being with this whole end of the world thing and he is going to restrict the coming World War III between Russia and China to a mere verbal fight. That’s right. When you send me 15% of your pay, God will step in and prevent the nuclear war that is still supposed to destroy one third of the earth. Remember, he wants to be merciful. It’s your fault he has to teach you the hard way. Thank you for your unquestioning devotion. The policy of deleting any e-mails or comments that question this still remains in affect as stated in the COG-PKG FAQ. Do not think. You are the lamb of Christ. Follow and obey. Don’t make me go Roman pre-Catholic on you.
Poehler: Thanks.
1 lb chicken, cut into chunks
This lovely card is what mom and I will be doing in tomorrow's (November 22nd) Intermediate class. The card is simple to focus on the colouring! Anyone who joins us tomorrow at 6:30pm for the class will be able to make this wonderful card!
The U.S.'s largest Marxist organization Democratic Socialists of America has infiltrated members and supporters into several state legislatures across the nation. Usually posing as Democrats, the covert socialists are then used to promote D.S.A. legislation and causes, such as gun control, single payer health care, leftist labor legislation etc. at the state level.
I wish U heaven
That request linked Solomon with the divine order of the universe. First and before all things, wisdom expresses herself in forms, outlines, boundaries and foundations. In line with wisdom’s true nature, Solomon asked for wisdom at the foundational moment of his Kingship. Humbly recognizing his need, he responded to the Lord in truth, giving him an accurate assessment of his shortcomings. God graciously filled him with wisdom and then added gifts Solomon did not ask for—riches and honor.
The King is a world heritage.
All of that said, I have done VERY well. I was, most definitly, and without realizing it, addicted! But the longer I go without it, the less appealing it is. However, I recently told Erik that when I go to Heaven, I am going to ask for LOTS and LOTS of ice cream. Because I miss it that much!!
For a full list of shipping restrictions at a specific DOS address, please contact the DOS facilities staff at that location or review the DOS restrictions beginning on page 26 here: http://www.state.gov/documents/organization/88704.pdf
They never would shoot each other.
Sweet country girl Kat Collins heads to Los Angeles to make it as an actress. Before she even gets to the city, Kat has picked up a hitchiker named Rhonda who promises her a place to stay as well as a showbiz "in." If this sounds entirely too good to be true, that's because it is! Rhonda's boyfriend Buck is a pornographer, but Kat comes from a planet that has never encountered pornography, so she hitches her star to his Hepatitis C train. While out celebrating with her new friends at an unconvincing biker bar, Kat is abandoned by Rhonda and Buck (who have a fully-clothed yet still very icky sex scene in a bar bathroom) only to get almost-raped by a gang. Fortunately, beefy Good Samaritans Victor (Erik Estrada, suffering from an alarming case of Tight-Pants-Itis) and Dirk (Richard Barathy) are there to save her, and they bring her back to what they wrongly assume is safety at Buck's place. The next day, Kat goes to her first audition, which turns out to be for an adult film (escandalo!) and is arrested for assaulting the crew during her escape from the set. After the world's most efficient trial, Kat is imprisoned--but not before telling her family that she's on a super-secret movie shoot in Mexico.
I wanted to have a full shot of my dress with my beautiful city behind me! But I don't think we chose the best location to showcase that...
On to the topic at hand, Glee inspires less and less confidence in me by the week. When thinking of things to mention for “Dance with Somebody” I was sincerely hard pressed to really talk about anything! The episode was a very wooden tribute episode to Whitney Houston (we all knew it would come, as tributes seem to be what mash ups used to be on this show… dime a dozen) with two main points of plot one that was intriguing and one that was annoying. For starters we have Quinn who is struggling with her disability grow closer to Joe. It actually is a compelling subplot, however this is marginalized by the fact that Joe is a raging stereotype of conservative home schooled Christians who generally speaking, are never particularly well portrayed… his long hair frankly doesn’t help either, it is borderline obstreperous! It almost is a shame because Samuel Larsen is actually quite talented, and the character has a certain brooding that almost runs counter to the petulant naivety that is written for him. On the other hand, the episode features a lovers spat with everyone’s favorite gays Kurt and Blaine. Don’t get me wrong this isn’t another rant about Glee’s heavy handed pro-gay stance, this is yet another critique of their absolute inability to write good conflict. It seems as though the writers are absolutely paranoid of having any kind of conflict that can’t be superficially resolved through what seems to the viewer as nothing shy of deus ex machina. In Season 1 the conflict between Finn and Rachel that spawned when Finn said he wasn’t sure if he was ready to date Rachel, took the rest of the season to resolve. Similarly in Season 2 the drama between Finn and Quinn getting back together occurs over multiple episodes as well as the fight that Finn and Rachel got into when Finn discovered that Rachel forced herself on Puck. You simply don’t see this in the writing anymore, all issues get mopped up so that the show can have neat little happy endings that ultimately please no one! All that goes to say that the conflict between Kurt and Blaine was handled in an unrealistic way that was very frustrating because just when I began to think that the show had the balls to actually make a conflict mean something, they copped out.
Look for natural leather satchel travelling bag, buckskin briefcases and leather satchels that have water-repellant characteristics. Several household leather totes get significant flap in addition to pouches and a few segments that happen to be squat turn. You must employ private opinion to decide which the very best will be. Hunt for sinuous gussets while in the household leather bags.
While it has been a joy to provide fresh baked goods to you for the past three-and-a-half years, our retail bakery business model is simply not sustainable, despite our countless loyal customers and the tireless dedication of my employees.
Around this house, valentines are a bit boring; they have become routine.
A week later I was hitchhiking, and the lawyer who was in the courtroom at my hearing picked me up and we laughed all the way through town. It was just a ridiculous coincidence.
As we settle into this new schedule I find myself much less stressed (at least till 3 pm when everyone is home again.) As soon as my iphone decides it's done syncing with my computer I will upload some pics of the kids from the first day of school. For now I am going to go put Caden on the bus and clean the bathroom while the babies sleep.
In a large pot, boil the raisins in enough water to cover (about 2 cups). Add the sugar and vinegar and stir. Set aside and let cool for about 10–12 minutes. To the same pot, add the butter, eggs, vanilla, and all the remaining dry ingredients. Mix well, then pour batter into pan. Bake for 35–45 minutes, or until tester comes out clean. Serve with whipped cream or a vanilla butter cream frosting.
24th April, Mother’s Final Arrival in Pondicherry
what do you think?? are you fond of twitter? addicted? or could you care less...
42) So hey, your friend told me you got the hots for me… i think she’s right! +
In the Christian Endeavor publication Golden Counsels, Dwight Moody made a point that has been missed by so many A.A. historians, writers, and commentators when they talk about “listening to God” without conceding or understanding that the new birth must precede it:
2 Thessalonians 3: 1-2
Chaplins final speach in the Great Dictator
The CJLS, the Conservative Movement's North American halachic authority, voted to endorse two proposals on this issue in December 2006: The decision that ordination of practicing gay and lesbian rabbis is not permitted by Jewish Law (Rabbi Joel Roth,), and the decision permitting the ordination of practicing gay and lesbian rabbis (Rabbi Elliot Dorff and two colleagues).
He won’t falter or stumble! Oh so valiant! So brave!
Kuya Ulz – I will miss you, you know that. Thanks for everything my friend.
I once met a theologian who was extremely pious, but who had the habit of speaking to the (secular) people around him in a very blunt manner; his method penetrated so deeply that it shook them very severely.
Bearing in mind that whites account for 90% of the population, simple maths suggests that non-whites attack and wound whites at a rate forty-five times higher than whites wound non-whites. This is a truly shocking figure and one that should be of enormous concern to the race relations industry, the government and the media, who purport to be intensely interested in both racial crime and “community cohesion”. However, this appears not to be the case at all.
All I know is that as soon as I can, I'll be putting this complication behind me by renouncing my US citizenship. It's years in the offing, of course (and who knows - the IRS may never get their act together on this), but who needs these wallet-snatching Americans in their back pocket when all they do with the money is give it to their friends in the large multinationals?
- The body supports and gives meaning to psychological states.
“Well, of all the nerve! I will have you know I enjoyed every minute of today. It was a blast. It’s a good thing you don’t work with me Minnie. I can’t stand a party pooper.”
Mark you calendars for Tuesday, August 30th for the next E-Team blog hop. It will be another installment of "It's Better With Color" series featuring Claudine Hellmuth Studio Paints.
So after hefting the kayaks out of storage, squeezing into life jackets designed for elementary school kids and a quick crash course in paddling we hit the lake.
Around me the cyclone screams it’s muted chaos but it is tranquil where I am. I am under a ray of sunlight. I can feel it on my skin. My limbs are torn from the Tornado’s debris, though I feel no sting. The pain is instead in my chest and throat and jaw. It’s sharp and it’s deep and it’s dense. My body is exhausted and drained, yet tensed; I’m screaming a long, unceasing, guttural scream, a scream so intense it is soundless. My face contorts, not in agony, but in grief.
in bed with a heating pad
Whut? I didn't know he was starting to learn his colors. I guess we need to become better friends with this book.
Awards ceremonies
For that matter, Shinzon himself is dumb. He was cloned from Picard. Okay, I can accept that, although it is getting incredibly implausible how special Picard supposedly is. The Romulans are disappointed with him, so they dump into slave labor as a five year old child. He winds up among a race of beings called Remans, which we have never heard of. They are also slave laborers. In spite of all this, they manage to build state of the art ship right under the Romulans’ noses and muster enough power to take over the empire. I cannot buy it. They do not have the resources or secrecy to do such a thing. I sense the Sparta us homage, but it does not work when you are talking about an interstellar empire.
Now, lest you think Buddy's babies are being mistreated, I have to add that they seem as delighted by all this fun as he is. And he knows the routine. He either barks or grrrs softly at the door when he feels it's time to come in and warm up, or take a snooze, tired out from all that strenuous activity. Sometimes, he just stands by the door, expecting me to read his mind, and I've gotten pretty good at that. We've had a lot of practice.
Govender said the city recovered income lost as a result of power theft by increasing the electricity tariff for paying customers throughout the Durban area.
Michael became increasingly concerned with what he was seeing in the Luoyang orphanage, and contacted several adoptive families to inform them of the situation. He also decided to contact WACAP directly, and outlined many of his findings and concerns. Within two days, Michael was contacted by the orphanage and informed that he would not be permitted to return to the orphanage, with officials citing concerns that he was a carrier of swine flu.
There are also 3 new lipglosses ($32USD) in the collection - Sunny Coral, Sensual Brown, and Indigo Blue. The Khol Kajal Eyeliner is a deep blue indigo that is pigmented and glides on the skin easily. It retails for $36USD.
where it starts getting interesting - "Congress also resolved that the SACP in the Province should be in contact with the Party at a national level to monitor the growing threats that there could be attacks on senior party leaders and their families especially in this province in
When she finished, she picked his head up and smiled at him again. “Now, I don’t know if you have children of your own young man, but if you do, anytime they need you, just remember that song.”
Knowing how to yield is strength.
At great risk to himself, his family and a wide network of brave supporters, Chen has been delivered safely into our Embassy. Meanwhile, members of his family and key supporters have been beaten or detained.
the ‘team’
organic eggs anyway, shulz bacon – 16
How healthy is it?
Need a sense of humor, sense of humor -- and answer the question. When somebody says, "What do blacks think?" say, "This is what I think. This is what I read that if you take a poll the majority of blacks think this." Answer the question and discuss the issue. It's like we can't discuss anything without saying there's -isms?
(11 PNG @ 300ppi)
She says that she lives in the moon, by a star,
another Soul just passed me by.
That's right friends! Screaming Yellow Zonkers, the buttery glazed popcorn snack that was born in the 1960's is making a comeback this year! Starting May 15, Screaming Yellow Zonkers will be available nationwide at Walgreen's stores. I used to love Screaming Yellow Zonkers, and must have eaten my weight in them during the 70s and 80s.
Cooked them in oil till golden brown
Very thought-provoking and really interesting day, as we had hoped. A couple of the guys (have already) used message maps.
KAMANDI -Archive Edition Vol. 1 by Jack Kirby (issues 1-10)
78. How to Save a Life Sara Zarr
Heat the oil in a large skillet over medium heat. Saute the carrot and bell pepper until soft, about 10 minutes. Add half of the coconut milk and the green curry paste. Heat until the curry paste is dissolved. Add remaining coconut milk, tamari, and salt. Crumble the tofu into the skillet. Simmer for about 14 minutes. Add the baby spinach and stir until it wilts. Top each serving with cilantro and Sriracha sauce.
Even while my nerves are a wreck, I’m looking forward to seeing Coop on the mound, and Mitzi too, when she has her turn pitching for her softball team. And, just as I cheer them on, I’ll also be cheering for the other kids, even those on the other team.
However, we must also note with sadness that some journalists in the mass media reporting on this deplorable event have betrayed all sense of measure and the cultural traditions of our city which developed over the course of three centuries to become one of the great national legacies.
ETA: Hmmmmmmmmmmm, I just figured out that there is no one hosting my photos anymore. Awesome. My ex-husband must have never forwarded me my subscription notice to renew (I know, not his problem, I should have remembered to renew on my own). So you can’t see my pretty dress but I’ll start trying to fix that slowly and surely. Drat. That’s gonna be a lot of work. I need to migrate those photos to another photo album and then link all the photos again. Anyone know of an easy way to do that for three year’s worth of photos????
(And I have to ask – what’s with Cam Gigandet? I have seen him in three movies in the past three months, and I STILL don’t recognize the guy. Total charisma suck.)
If you haven't realized by now, April's last name is Fool!
I’m a freelance publicist with clients that have included Entangled Publishing and Month9Books. In addition, I’m a YA fantasy writer and book blogger. I have my blog for writing and publicity stuff and the Fantasy Book Addict for book recommendations/reviews, interviews with authors, and contests/giveaways.
Despite my initial caution & a nagging feeling of unease, I started listening to the answers that these extreme prophetic people would give to the sceptics.
I took a few iPhone shots to document the wretched occasion.
Luckily I was home alone this weekend and nobody could be disgusted with my messy creative'ness.
5. Sambucol/Sambucus/Sambu Guard: Though the brand name may be different, and the ingredients may not all be the same, one thing reigns true: elderberry is a wonderful, natural immune system booster that almost everyone can take to prevent and treat things like colds and flu. In my opinion, it can probably combat a lot more than those simple ailments, but things like that are not evaluated by the FDA.
Beneath the statute on the stair.
Burdens? This and that?
That isn’t much of a big deal either. So let’s do that as well. We will attract more and more Muslim customers. And that can only be a good thing.
This is one of those decks where the cards really need to be looked at and meditated on to have their message come forward. When you use them in a reading you are encouraged to combine the key word with the meanings of the colours of the angel cards.
Perhaps more impressive are their cocktails. I had the pleasure of trying The Big Apple with Leopold Brothers' NY Apple Whiskey, Campari, Apple Cider, Lemon and Bitters. It might look almost too sweet and fruity on the menu, but it's definitely not - the Campari's herbal bitterness definitely tempered the other ingredients, and the cider is more about the bubbles than sugar, making this a delightful daytime sipper.
I think that is always the hardest part for me in this situation – not knowing what went wrong.. Cos it eats me up as I revisit the last conversation and go “where did I cock it up?”
My father is seated, frozen in time in his white vest. Silk cut hanging from his mouth, cup of steaming English tea beside him and eyes fixed on his daily paper. I brush my hand against his strong knuckles. Such a hard worker my father. They were built from a different mould then. Covered in cement at fifteen, king of a claw hammer by twenty one. Pink plaster under his yellow fingernails but a wit that could compact the hardest of tarmac.
Erm… Gobsmacked. Speechless. Confused.
Windows and doors can, unless listed, be changed at will, and yet -- perhaps more than any other feature -- they express a building's character. They are the eyes and mouth of its face.
Roukens de Lange, A (1993). Manpower in South Africa: Trends in Demand, Supply, Remuneration and Skill. Occasional Paper No 20, Institute for Futures Research, University of Stellenbosch.
Ah god, I got it. I rode on the right bus but to opposite direction. The place I wanted to go was at the opposite of this bus route. Terribly, 1 hour trip became 3 hours, and in this horrible roller coster. Say no more!!
“The Lord reigns, he is robed in majesty;
This philosophy — beautifully written as it is — offers little solace to the questing heart. In his Noble Prize acceptance speech, however, Faulkner suggests that we are not condemned to a fate of despair, that we may, indeed, find lasting meaning in our lives. Listen!
Though after I’ve quit I may write a tell-all article about the experience.
The Pop-Up Exhibition went really really well.
So, I have been busy, honest, I have been playing Xbox and teaching Physical Theatre too, but I have been doing lots of film stuff…I also tried to change career paths for a bit, didn’t work out, funny story….not worth telling.
If we would but try we could transform our own lives.
Don't worry about doing perfect sketches. They're just for you, and it's just a learning tool. But don't just scribble them out, either, put enough into them that you are actually getting enough down that you are seeing the patterns and getting down how the staging and cutting is working. Be precise, but don't spend too much time on each individual drawing. You want to do them fast enough that you can see the cutting patterns over several scenes, and if you spend an hour making each sketch perfect, you won't ever get the feel of how several scenes are linking together in a row.
Allowing love means being willing to go out on dates and explore the possibilities of a relationship. Allowing love means getting out of your head and stepping into your heart because love cannot be attracted or found with the head. It’s PURELY an affair of the heart. Choosing who to be in a relationship with and/or who to marry is a matter for the head.
“I felt my time here has been very happy for me, and hopefully the new owner will be able to enjoy what I’ve enjoyed over the years — conversations with people, the uniqueness of the area and so on — and keep the history alive,” Sammons said.
We walked in the sunshine to our hotel - we were staying in a self-contained flat with kitchen and bathroom (Cosy's), which was a brilliant idea. Even though we never actually used the kitchen facilities, it was lovely to have a proper fridge for once, and the option of cooking, if we'd been so inclined. For longer trips, I can see it being a godsend - there's only so much cheese-on-things you can eat... The hotel was a little bit outside the centre of town, towards the castle and the zoo, and it was in a lovely leafy avenue near a university. We will be going back, I'm sure.
This is something I can’t wait to try in my Pathfinder game on Sunday 7/25!
Eric and I had talked about adoption before and he seemed to be on board "after we have our own children". I remember a very specific conversation I had with him one time about adopting and (after we were unsuccessful to get pregnant right away) he just didn't seem like that was what he wanted to do. I just remember him desperately wanting to have our own children first. So I just dropped the subject because there is not point in trying to convince him of something he doesn't want to do!!! LOL Plus, you don't want to bring a child into a home whenever both parents aren't on board, I feel like that is a disservice to the child. BOTH parents need to be ready and willing!
So he got there. We talked to Mom and Gram for a while, and then went for a walk. Mostly because we wanted to be alone, but also because we’d both been sitting all day and kind of had ants in our pants.
Throughout the next upcoming blogs I’ll be previewing my opinion on each & every fear causing this dilemma, starting from the fear of “Guilt” to “Rejection” and “Inadequacy”; and your comments will be much appreciated upon this.
Porton biondi
I adore simple but flavorful dal soups that are easy to digest. The most time consuming process for this recipe is the preparation, but even that won't take long. A creamy and spicy dish that pairs well with rice and naan bread. I always enjoy cooking Indian vegetarian dishes. The aromas are soothing and stimulate the appetite. That is also a reason why I enjoy visiting Indian grocery stores. There is always something new to explore and add to my overstuffed kitchen, and you will find all the ingredients you need for this recipe there.
Jillian finishes the thought quoted above with:
It started several years ago. At first we thought it was just an affectation. Son C has a lot of those; he had been diagnosed a few years earlier with Asperger Syndrome and mild Tourette's so he has a lot of quirks. We thought this was just more of the same.
Since we used vintage wooden tiles, the studio smelled really nice when my daughter did the drilling. Not sure exactly what wood these tiles were made from, but the aroma told us they were quality hard wood.
Palace are taking this showdown very seriously as evidenced by their manager’s decision to rest some key players in their recent 2-1 defeat to Blackpool. Cardiff didn’t have that luxury as they went full strength in their continuing pursuit of promotion, and it paid off as they scored a late winner against Portsmouth to snatch victory.
One Hot Pleasure (The Riddler Instrumental) Electronica 130 bpm 6:18
My first attempt in Long Exposures. After watching A Lot Like Love with a former paramour I asked him if we could go on a Photodate. Of course, he said yes.
Even the wind had stopped breathing.
Today I planned to do, and did, some work out in the yard, the grooming stuff like cutting off the water sprouts on the crepe myrtles, digging up pecan tree sprouts, pruning off the spent rose branches and in general tidying up around the yard. The place I started at is a small bed by the driveway that has a rose bush, an althea, a ginkgo tree, and a lantana. I had tossed some larkspur seeds in there last
It's a rainy day here. I have been working on school work most of the afternoon. I am a bit tired of looking at my computer screen, so I am not about to draw in Photoshop today. I kind of feel like being lazy and hanging on the couch. Not sure yet, if that is what I will do.
old (17 years ago) I was working a new job as an accountant. The company had recently gone public. My wife of 1 year and I had just poured every cent we had into a down payment on a modest suburban home. We had no cash left. No financial reserves. After a few months, I realized the company was misstating their financial position. Now, the ethical thing to do is to report the malfeasance, right? Well, let’s throw some other dynamics in there. As I said, I was cash poor. The auditing firm, who would get sued if the financial misstatement were uncovered, was my former employer. If I go all whistleblower on everyone, my concern was that I would never get a job in accounting again. Whistleblowers don’t have good job prospects going forward. What did I do. I talked to the General counsel of the company. He blew me off. I found a job and was out the door in less than a month. I did not take my beef to the SEC. In
3 future
I have just sat on my back door step feeding my visiting ducks - bliss. They are partial to well soaked (dripping wet) bread and seeds. I give them only tiny amounts as they must not become dependent on me. In fact it was my soppy husband who started this - he who does not want ducks or chickens, despite my pleas, has now said he doesn't mind?? So now they hear us around and come running, searching the ground around our feet for any scattered largesse!
Whatever booth you stop at will have its own interesting story to tell. It might be a family business, started a few generations ago. They might sell a less common seafood type, which you can learn all about it. The people might have created a compelling new product, and could have an interesting origin tale. Maybe they offer a sustainable seafood product but from a region not known for such practices. It is a fertile ground for writers who can easily find plenty of ideas for stories. And if you don't write, the tales are still fascinating to hear and will give you fodder for the watercooler the next day. Who doesn't enjoy a great story?
“Really, you are like so gross, why don’t you just stop it?” He stared all slack-jawed for awhile and then turned around to face his whatever and that was the end of that. Because even then I instinctively knew, had I said, all playing nice like the correctors and other bullies of adoptees, which include some adoptees claim, had I just said “Hey boy, be nice, he why don’t you just stop, or hey I would really appreciate it if you didn’t spew your grossness all over my afternoon that I want to make clouds in” It would have ended with him justifying. Telling me that Asians really were ugly, that they really were bad drivers. It would have reinforced his ugliness.
The Yankees, who have benefited from $943 million in tax-exempt bonds, with savings of nearly $200 million, would like to issue perhaps $350 million more, and the city and state are asking the IRS and the Treasury Department, which have proposed tightening federal regulations, to grandfather in the request.
100/50…2:15
This is what my polish looked like after 6 days. Please excuse the cuticles - they're in desperate need of manicure attention at this point. Though you can see some tip wear, there is absolutely no chipping. Sweet! The index finger has a strange reflection on the tip that's making it look like a chip, but there is no chip there, just some minimal tip wear. This is a more accurate picture of the color than the one below.
Yesterday (Sunday) was the last race in this year's season and with 4 drivers in the running for the championship it proved to be a good race. 1 crash - Schumacher spinning before being mounted by Liuzzi (pic from bild.de) where Schumi looked to be inches away from decapitation, but thanks to modern technology the F1 cars these days seem to have life preserving capabilities. Alonso (1 of the 4 in contention for the title) was kept back and away from the leading pack by Petrov (as Alonso clearly saw it, anyway) leading to Alonso coming alongside Petrov after the chequered flag had been waved and 'expressing his anger'.
David Freud’s history is interesting: he previously worked as a journalist for the Financial Times and then joined a leading UK investment bank (UBS investment banking), where he was on record as saying to his deputy: “If the rest of the country knew what we were being paid, there would be tumbrels on the streets and heads carried round on pikes”. In his city career he frequently got things seriously wrong. As one reviewer of his book put it, Freud “will be remembered in the City as one of the key players in several of the most embarrassing and badly managed deals in investment banking”. His revenue forecasts were, in his own words: “completely potty”; according to the Daily Telegraph, his financial plans for Euro Disney “went so goofy they almost wrecked his career” and on the Channel Tunnel Rail Link he got his sums wrong by £1.2 billion and had to be bailed out by the Government (www.variant.org.uk/events/Doc7Poverty/BankerBankies.pdf ).
Then a terrorist bomb detonates. In the operating room, the president suffers cardiac arrest. He has a near-death experience-but the memories that flash through Jerrison's mind are not his memories.
Water or orange juice or a light syrup of your making ( basically a sugar water mix, the more sugar the heavier the syrup). I prefer a lite sugar water to a syrup as it helps the oranges taste fresher.
During lunch I learned a math technique called "double division" from a math teacher here in Qatar. It is a technique where you can do long division without knowing anything about multiplication. Very cool (if you are into math!)
Coriander powder – 1 teaspoon
Oddly enough, I never thought about any of the females in my story as being “strong” or unusual. The positive reaction to the characters was definitely a reaction to all the stereotypical women in these kinds of books. People were genuinely surprised to reach such positive portrayals. The readers weren’t surprised that the women were strong and competent; they were surprised to see an accurate portrayal of themselves, their wives, their girlfriends, mothers, and sisters. Quite a few male friends have told me that they loved how certain female characters reminded them strongly of the women they love. Female fans have also shared how refreshing it was to see women doing the types of things they would do in the zombocalypse—like killing zombies.
Another thing I did that wasn't mentioned in the DH's instructions was when it came time to push the Junior Mints into the cream to create the center of the eye, I put the Oreos back in the micro for a few seconds again so the cream was soft and would allow the candies to be pushed down into the cream to stay put better.
The internet is an exceptionally popular tool that is growing every day. Now days almost everyone uses the internet to some degree, from children to seniors. So it should come as no surprise that the internet is an excellent source of money making opportunities.
For the final project, we selected a work of fiction. From this, we visualized our experience with the book for a series of 12 photographs.
So I believe we go into parenting based on what we see others do, how we were raised of course, and by the very NEEDS of our children- if we take the time to listen to those needs.
We can also see from the map that, once the area had been logged, the BN YB Daud’s family enterprise started to take advantage of Sarawak’s “plantation phase”, with a very large area handed out to the key PBB politician through the company Eastbourne Properties.
Naia Kete, Turning Tables – Blake suggested that Naia sing this song true to the original instead of giving it a reggae vibe, and I agreed with that suggestion. It’s a great song as it is, and I think she sang it very well. Christina didn’t like it at all, and she didn’t try to hide that much either. I think her comments went beyond “constructive” and were just rude.
The kingdom that suffered in the economic sector as well as in the job market, is hoping to regain the lost glory. The real estate market was one of the most affected during the year-long protests by the kingdom’s majority Shia section. Some of the key areas, including capital Manama, is among the badly hit. Flat and commercial rents were slashed 50 percent: Landlords were forced to reduce the rents to avoid further losses on the buildings and the car parks, on which they were already paying taxes.
2012 is already shaping up to be a fantastic and extremely unpredictable season. I had no idea what to expect, going into today’s race and it really was anybody’s game. Mercedes had a fantastic qualifying session on Saturday, with Nico Rosberg finally getting his first pole. Michael Schumacher qualified a respectable 3rd, but started on the front row in 2nd, after Lewis Hamilton received a 5 grid spot penalty, for a gear box change.
Trying to pretend the 2 was not there,
Once the paint was dry, I sewed the two sides of the pillow together (right sides together), leaving a slit to flip the pillow right side out.
In November, while I was in Cancun celebrating my 20th wedding anniversary, contestant numbers were chosen. I was chosen Contestant #1. To be honest, that didn't bother me. I've been a performer all my life, so I don't have much fear of the stage.
Jarrod & Gary
this is a wonderful chance.
Ready to blast daddy
However, his perineometer was never marketed effectively and there was a widespread misconception that Kegels could not be performed without it. In the 1970s, more sensitive electromyography (EMG) perineometers became available for those with severely debilitated pelvic muscles.
The night is soft indeed, with not a sough of wind. Gentle, gentle. Over by the church across the field, from the hidden slopes of Trelystan Dingle I hear the muted yelp of a fox. Behind me in the dark conifers of Badnage Wood is the whispery whoot of a tawny owl. Oh, this is pretty good; the cries of the night; the scent of the garden, green, earth and sweet peas.
shot of Worcestershire
The Seriake Dickson administration has however vowed it would not procure the new vehicles as presented to the administration and ordered that the carted vehicles be returned by ex-political appointees or face the wrath of the law.
We are expecting some snow this week -- forecast is for 1 - 8 inches (that narrows it down). So if we have snow days I may or may not be in my cubicle, but if I am I will be taking pictures and posting them to my blog.
(By the way, this recipe does not follow my traditional Altered Plates format, however, I think it's important to observe the integrity of the original published in Dave's book. Therefore, if you notice a difference, that's why. Also, I used coconut flour for the barley flour, but either one is fine.)
Fortunately the steps taken to improve safety in Formula One have been of massive leaps and boundaries. Many drivers since 1994, including Robert Kubica, Heikki Kovalainen, Takuma Sato and more recently in Hungary in 2009 with Felipe Massa have had serious, frightening accidents. All have been able to live the tail and go racing again. The 1994 San Marino Grand Prix will go down as the darkest weekend in motorsport history and eighteen years on, its pain will never heal.
The next morning set the oven temperature at 190C or 375F and bake the loaves for approximately 30-50 minutes depending on the size and shape of your loaves. I bake mine in double length commercial loaf pans for 50 minutes until the centre bottom of the loaf is hollow when thumped. The tops of this bread are quite dark, if you prefer them less browned cover the loaves with a bit of tin foil after they have achieved the desired colour and continue baking until done.
Oops! One rejection and from a facebook friend I didn't realize until I saw the name again. Curious they wrote "nothing here to buy which interests me"...a curious rejection. Not painful. A funny thought, what if the disability journal rejects me. I'm not even good enough to be broken...kidding!
- sentiment, also by Elzybells, stamped using SU 'Real Red'
There are numerous problems here, the main one being that the “debate” between intelligent design and evolution is a “scientific issue.” It’s not, and there’s really not much “reasonable doubt” about that in most quarters. Bachmann’s elevation of opinion to the level of theory–or, more appropriately, leveling of theory to opinion–also serves a clear political function, as is all too clear.
Then, then he started to wander
1/2 tablespoon commercial chili powder
He's fucking with my life. He's fucking with my boyfriend's life... I don't know what I did wrong, but he's been avoiding me for a week and then this morning I get a text message saying something shitty and telling me to take next week off. And that he'll get my boyfriend next week off too (we work for sister companies) so we can "just play house" together. Whatever the fuck that means. He says all this fucked up shit that makes no sense. He's threatening to demote me back to that company. And that if things are slow my boyfriend can go to the office and help me. Which makes no sense. He's just trying to be an asshole. And he's fucking good at it. Piece of shit. He's completely isolated me from all other employees so he can just emotionally abuse me.
The titular wedding is that of Piti, a young Haitian who endeared himself to the author (“How the Garcia Girls Lost Their Accents,” “In the Time of the Butterflies”) while working on the organic coffee farm Alvarez operates with her husband, Bill, in her native Dominican Republic. She calls that unexpected life detour “the coffee-farm vaudeville act.”
UDeCOTT and the HDC are the State’s two main agencies in the move to physical development, they are both under the Ministry of Planning, Housing and the Environment.
This man, Bro C.M. Becton, polished, classy and Spirit filled, will be missed by many. His life represents Christ and a servant’s heart. He’s irreplaceable. There will be no other like him.
Big G Prize Pack: Lana B
I published weekly meal plans for the majority of the year which really helped our family nutrition. I am diving more into healthy meals this year - still room to improve!
Another complication of this is called Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura or (TTP). TTP causes clotting of blood within small blood vessels, anemia due to fragmentation of red blood cells, and shortage of platelets (thrombocytopenia) that results in easy bruising, neurologic abnormalities, impaired kidney function, and fever. The difference is that TTP usually has a fever where HUS does not.
Pilafs made from rice or wheat. Dishes- savory and sweet- made using yogurt. Turkish cuisine is filled with vegetables, and if I wanted I could even make a vegetarian supper quite easily. Kebabs, meatballs, and chicken Tava sound so good though. They all seem to be calling my name! Of course I mustn't forget the soup, which is a very traditional way to start a meal over there, and perfect for a cool November evening.
Kahera, Akel Ismail. Deconstructing the American Mosque: Space, Gender and Aesthetics. University of Texas Press: Austin, 2002.
And finally, to round off February--pictures of Gabe swinging at the park!! We were in Spanish Fork (my old stompin' grounds!!) so we decided to stop off at Barry's (CLASSIC--Yum!!) and then headed across the street to play at the SF city park. Gabriel loves the swings. As far as going to the park is concerned--he only cares about that and running around. Doesn't give a second thought to the slide or the jungle gym or anything else (except for when Mama makes him take the slide at least once...)
pretend foes,
I’m such a hoarder that I can’t get the idea of collecting them all out of my head.. lol.. pity 05 Pastel Peach is LE and no longer available.. That kinda dampens my collector’s spirit.. but if anyone has one in need of a better home, let me know! hahahahaha
07. Heart's All Gone
Forty years after the loss of Bangla-Desh, the Pakistani narrative does not recognize that Pakistan has few friends. Read this edited account by a Pakistani military official, stationed in Bangla-Desh during that key period.
REMEMBERING SHANNON
Szucs TD, Ruef C, Muller D, Sokolovic E, Beeler I, Ostermayer W. The economic impact of influenza in a university hospital setting. Infect Control Hosp Epidemiol 2001; 22: 473-474.
16. Right sides together, pin interior piece to exterior piece, ensuring handles are both tucked neatly toward the center. Using a 1/2" seam allowance, stitch around all 4 sides, leaving a 4-5" opening on one long side.
He had been dead some years and I was now living on the Lower East Side, frequenting CBGBS and other temples of the cool. Long before his passing I had distanced myself from the old ideologies and the violence that attended them. Still every now and then in the back of my mind I’d hear his echo, “Every generation must do their part to solve the British problem in the North of Ireland.”
I don't wanna talk about it. Maybe later.
Change of job- check- pretty much under control. Minor set back yesterday when I realized that the person who has done the job for the last seven years would not be available for three weeks for questions- by then I will already know everything! But the panic subsided as hubby reminded me that it wasn't long ago that I didn't know everything about the job i was doing and I managed to completely rock that one...so this one I am starting with more knowledge.
Samuel Adams Belgian Session is a crisp, bright version of a traditional Belgian beer with fruity, slightly spicy flavors from the Belgian yeast. After many trial batches made from a finicky Belgian yeast, the brewers redefined the typical session beer style, using subtly sweet toffee and caramel notes from a blend of pale and honey malts to harmonize with the yeast's distinct fruity and spicy flavors. By definition, session beers contain no higher than 5% ABV (Belgian Session is 4.3%), allowing the drinker to enjoy multiple beers during a "session."
A. I find it hard to trust anyone. I need to learn to let go of past hurts and trust in God wholeheartedly.
We followed the stream until it flowed into the river, easily identifiable by its size, and then we followed the river until it crossed the road leading into town. A short hike down that road, and we arrived at our prearranged pickup location, about an hour ahead of schedule.
Anywho, there’s no statue involved, just a little bit of work. There are three things I need to do after accepting this award. It’s sort of like a pay-it-forward thingy.
In the UK we celebrated Mothers Day on Sunday but we know that many of you are yet to celebrate it.
another day, another week—
LOWER DENS - Nootropics
I let out a groan from deep in my chest as my body stiffened and my insides exploded in an orgasm that I heard first inside of my head. It started as a rumble like thunder that gathered every bit of sensation my body could create and concentrated it in my cock and perineum. I felt it gather from my fingertips and my toes and my anus and my balls and well up just behind my cock. Then in one enormous squeezing pulse it shot a stream of white hot cum in the air. As the rope of cum was hurled from me the exquisite sensation of her finger in my anus forced another spasm to eject another rope of cum that followed the trajectory of the first one.
Not sure what ever happened to the tussle-haired chappie who sang like a soulful borracho. I never saw him with the band again.
Like another reformer mayor before him (William Russell Grace), Strong was a businessman made good, an Ohio-born dry goods merchant turned banker whose efficiency and clean record (not to mention prominent position on the influential Union League Club) endeared him to those looking for a clean break from Tammany.
The entire video gave a more complete story. It was only after it was shown (on the video) that the women first yelled a barrage of profanity at the cashier, before slapping him in the face. When he retreated, one of the women came over the counter, while the other went around the side to close off any chance he might have of escape
Her doctor told her 4 weeks ago, "If I looked at the charts I would say your condition is worse, but you are showing an unexpected and impossible improvement in your movement, speech, and overall condition..I am betting the virus I injected is taking hold" and Marissa replied, "You believe that and I am believing I am healed and whole by the hand of God". If this is not improvement, I don't know what is.
Caro decided to alter two small puzzle pieces using images from our sponsor. I first painted the pieces, then stamped a background onto each one, then printed, coloured and cut out the images and then added writing, gems and drawing. The coin in this photo is a 5p to give you an idea of scale (Close ups are on her blog).
I walked in the house, groceries and my Clamato beer in tow.
In the interview I did with the CBC we talked about my High School reunion. One of the things I tried to explain was my need to establish and maintain links to my past. It's much deeper discussion that I'm really looking to have right now, but I truly don't want to forget the past. Remembering is empowering.
The reason they are not spirits is because they are not entering the government, they are entering the realm of the government. If the government is heavenly, and the subjects are earthly, the distinction becomes clear.
2) Teach your children the meaning of these 3 words: sharing, caring, and cooperation.
His name is Danny.
1156. Escargot on Puff Pastry & Sausage Over Braised Cabbage @ Blind Pig (Louisville, KY) 7:22 p.m.
Currently Twitter does not have a system for identifcation authentication.
In conclusion, Aikido practiced with the correct mindset and focus can be an excellent self defense art without losing its beauty and grace. Obviously, beauty is in the eye of the beholder.
way of permitting the place for profit provided under Section 51 (a) (ii) and Section 79 which saves the intermediary from liability’. However, I would argue that S.51(a)(ii) covers more than just internet intermediaries and merely because they are granted additional protection, does not in itself render
I have been so busy with crochet and other orders, I haven't had a chance to post about my little competition again, but I haven't forgotten and should be ready to go next week, so watch this space!
My eyes are dimmed with sorrow, worn out because of all my foes.
Umm yeah…… Honey, work on not looking coked out of your mind. Her eyes were crazy and she just looked so mature and overly tanned. I really, really, really dislike this but its nothing compared to the last horror.
I was on board with the idea of a jaded public, and the demise of the once great dinosaur spectacular. I was also willing to journey with the circus folk as they endeavoured to take their last few dinosaur performers back to the plateau of El Grande in Venezuela where the ‘saurs used to live. But the trek back to the lost world was so boring!
Dear Erin,
issued under the authority of
As the above picture clearly illustrates, we brewed the beer on a Sunday morning, and many of us had had a late Saturday night. Luckily we had donuts from Acme Donuts, and not much work to do for a lot of the time. Some drinking was done and it was decided that we all really like Green Flash "Rayon Vert", as well as The Commons "Flemish Kiss", both dry hopped, brett-aged belgian pale ales inspired by Orval.
Experts’ debate vigorously about the technique employed to calculate the ERP and, of course, the resulting answer but why does the ERP matter? In modern portfolio theory, the ERP helps to set portfolio return expectations and determine asset allocation policy. For example, a higher premium would mean you would invest a greater share of your portfolio into equities. In theory, a stock that is riskier than the market (measured by beta) should offer excess returns above the ERP. The premium is also a key element in many cost of equity models. For example, the capital asset pricing model requires an ERP to compute a cost of equity called the discount rate – the higher the risk premium, the higher the cost of equity.
Skirt : Down East Basics
Don't be fooled by this breakfast item, it was actually a late night snack. With fresh raspberries in my fridge, I felt the need to be all decadent and fancy with my food. This is such a easy recipe that exact measurements are really unnecessary.
I am thankful for God's love and abundance that gives us enough love to share if we allow Him to use us.
because I am me
His most profound observation on them, though, is at the heart of why any kind of social/political/religious agreement or mutual understanding with them is impossible. He writes of them:
And the colors of the world
We have a month until we have to move out of our house now (and into a townhouse temporarily until our house is complete). This impending move has been feeling irritable, anxious, and distracted. So, a little apology in advance if I seem to be in a perpetual bad mood this month! Disarray doesn't agree with me and I know this is all temporary, but it doesn't make it any easier for me!
Haunting Baker Street
More tiny frogs got tired and gave up...But ONE continued higher and higher and higher... This one wouldn’t give up! At the end everyone else had given up climbing the tower. Except for the one tiny frog who after a big effort was the only one who reached the top!
Dies: Go Kreate XXL Frames Frilly #1; Spellbinders Classic Circles; Tim Holtz Sizzlits Festive Greenery
Mackerel-scented fingers are too prosaic as a memory trigger and can hardly compete with Proust's madelines for romance, but all the same, I spent the whole journey wrapped in the comforting memories of a blissful fortnight spent in wonderful company, rediscovering simple pleasures.
People who use the C word aren't necessarily bad people, they're just deviants.
So more exactly, this is beginning to look like a sex-for-projects scandal….with the police involved on a grand scale. The Parti Socialiste will of course distance itself from this as much as possible. But graft at this level and with such a depth of grubbiness has a habit of involving rather more people than at first thought. Crucially, it adds a new dimension to the DSK affaire: that of a man not only addicted to constant sexual conquest, but also very probably happy to use his Presidential powers to feed the addiction.
Mickey Hart – drums
(and of course all manner of post-apocalyptic, science fiction & robot related movies had to be watched to ‘research’ some of these ideas and addle my brain even further…)
Being a man’s man, Jaxon was tall, strong, agile, and eager to explore everything the world had to offer him. Young and good-looking, the girls adored him. By the time he was eighteen, J.P. stood six feet four inches tall, and weighed two hundred and thirty pounds. Jaxon was extremely loyal to his family. Both Donald and Georgia thought the world revolved around him. As a boy, Jaxon had a love affair with baseball hats. He owned over a thousand of them, and wore a different one everyday. God couldn’t have made a better looking man. He was muscular, born work ready. His physique would have put Hercules to shame. Jaxon was built for physical labor. Broad shoulders and forearms the size of footballs, Jaxon certainly turned heads.
let the countdown begin. I'm going home in less than a week and couldn't be more excited about it, I really need to clear my head... life (=work) has been a bit crazy in the last few month and I've discovered I like it that way - possibly a little too much for my own good.
I just realized that I bought 3 pairs of shorts, and all three have rolled cuffs.
And how about if you struggle with being a quarrelsome wife..there seems to be quite a few scriptures on that...Provers 17:1, Proverbs 21:9, Proverbs 21:19, Proverbs 25:24, Proverbs 27:15,...I think we ought not be quarrelsome. ;)
I adapted an Emeril recipe for kebabs added a Cognac peppercorn sauce, made a big Caesar salad, and EVOO and herb seasoned dinner rolls…Yes I avoided the whole HoJo menu from last week’s episode, where I spied a black Mercury, I think, parked next to Don’s car in the lot, the one with the slanted “breezeway” window just like the one my dad bought.
For my project...I used a Jif Peanut Butter Jar that I had saved for an event such as this...to be able to reuse it for a project, like a candy jar, instead of it going to a landfill!! All the paper that I used was from my supply of scraps that I have kept from other projects. All the embellishments were extras that I just had sitting around or ones that I had cut or made for other projects but just didn't use them for what ever reason. I have to say that I was pretty excited to use things that I already had that might normally had gotten discarded. :) The only thing that I bought for the project was the Snicker's candy bars that went inside, which are my dad's favorite. He was facing some scary medical issues, which he is really good now, so I stuck to bright fun colors & spring-ish items like Butterflies to lighten the mood. He has already asked me how the jar gets refilled. :)
I pondered this all weekend. Why do some cultures, my own as an example, need to have so many words and concepts for BLISS and other cultures don't have any and it's really a stretch to even conceptualize it in their language.
2 Nobodys Driving 5:03
May brings warmer weather to New England. Here in the Boston area our temperature averages are in the 60s at the start of the month and rise to the 70s by the end of the month. Though some in southern New England have already seen their last frost for the year, usually the warm season crops aren't planted until May 15th, or May 31st in more northern areas. A good rule of thumb is to plant warm weather crops two weeks after your average last frost date, as these plants will die if they see a frost. A list of these include: tomatoes, peppers, basil, tomatillo, beans, cucumbers and squash. Some warm weather crops are more finicky. If your season is long enough it would be prudent to wait 4 weeks after your last frost for melons and eggplant. They much prefer the warmer nights of summer to the cool nights of spring.
The first being ,which episode to choose! Say Knife, Fat Man? Survival Code? hmm... Intonation and transcription present a problem also and if any music is covering up words too. Fortunately, there isn't a lot of music used in DOOMWATCH and if there are any words not covered across the series, the only way to fix it would be to read in the affected words or possibly replace the actor altogether.
Okay, perhaps the title of this post is a little deceptive. Some of you may be thinking this is another post about Loxo the Elephant, but you would be mistaken. (Although, if you haven’t kept up with the developing Loxo, I highly recommend you pay him a visit at home or on Facebook!) The title more correctly refers to Sea Lions, Elephant Seals and Sea Otters, but that seemed too wordy and descriptive. This post actually builds upon last week’s trip to the Pacific coast of California (see Long John Silver Slept Here, for the first installment), featuring some of the landscapes and wildlife encountered between Morro Bay and the Monterey Bay. We wound our way up the Pacific Coast Highway (US Highway 1) on a splendid day, filled with sunshine and mist from the ocean. For those of you who have never traveled this route, let it suffice to say that this is not a place to be if you are in a hurry. On the other-hand, if sight-seeing and enjoying the splendor of God’s Creation appeals to you, put this destination on your to-do list!
Unperturbed Coal sat on the ground to think, for he had all the time in the world now he was here. He shifted to the side of the corridor and felt the bricks there up until they met up with the wall door feeling for any crack or crevice, finding none he did the same on the other side. The feeling of disappointment and anguish at what he might have to face if he couldn’t find a way through shot into his belly. Then his finger caught on the lip of a brick sticking out from the door wall, he spent the next two hours prying it from its place. His fingers aching and numb with cold the final tug sent a split of light through the darkness. Coal quickly lay down on his front and put his eye to the crevice.
— Encourage the public to voice grievances against the news media.
As mentioned earlier this week, Michael had to go on a last-minute business trip to Hawaii. For a week. Before he left, he asked if I wanted any souvenirs and I answered with my all-time favorite answer: "Yarn."
Where do I keep superlative grayness jewelry?
Caroline! Air headed cheerleader/vampire who is becoming more awesome as the show progresses.
B: So I took blah-blahs word for it at this time. I thought just having a friend couldn't be no crime. Cause I have friends and that's a fact, like agnes, agatha, jermaine, and jack.
My ovens are full...
ME: I drove you to Twindy's house so you could sleep over?
I have never wanted so much for a week to be over.
will be given, and he will have abundance, but from him who does not
Have a great two weeks and we'll be back with the next challenge on 13th January
Macaroni and cheese with pears and grapes
But unfortunately the party was in Florida and he was in New York.
It has been well over a month since my last post :-(. I've been crafting, but just can't find the time to get projects posted. I'm hoping to find more time to participate in all the great challenges out there.
If you can’t believe in the you who believes in yourself, then believe in the me who believes in you. I know what I’m talking about here, and I know you can do this. I’m not just speaking in general terms here. I know you can do this, because it’s a skill I had to learn, too. If you think I wriggled out of my mother’s cesarean incision with these skills, you’re wrong. If you think I don’t still have work left to do, you’re wrong. Odds are that we are not so different that you cannot do what I did, and am still learning to do.
Is there a driving instructor somewhere teaching people to do this? Or is it just passed down generation to generation from one shitty driver to the fruit of that shitty driver’s loin?
The Stony Brook Southampton campus is located in Southampton, NY, the heart of the Hamptons – a beautiful and renowned resort area on the East End of Long Island.
Another piece of our local history gone west!
One disc is remastered from the original DAT digital master - that used for the 1991 original release - and the other disc is mastered from the original half-inch analog tape master. Arcane, yes, but to me the differences are significant and wonderful (the new analog version is definitive).
· Providing solar lighting system at 1,000 manned level crossing gates.
To Kafka was Kafka a metamorphosis of a dream
Drain, then Wrap the tubing up.
Thanks for indulging me!
"This planet is the new best candidate to support liquid water and, perhaps life as we know it”, Anglada-Escudé said in a statement.
At the end of the tanda, he tells me, "You know, you have such a wonderful embrace. I always enjoy our dances together."
As always, if you love the look or sound of this recipe, feel free to pin it or share it.
On came striker Danny Welbeck for the ineffective Park Ji-Sung to provide support for the frustrated Wayne Rooney and United were transformed for a short period as the edginess returned to the hosts.
Risen points out that "most of them lived in the United States before going to Afghanistan, leveraging the president's position to put them at the center of a new oligarchy of powerful Afghan families." For example:
I’d also like to blame Norwich who played park-the-bus-hoof-and-run as well as anyone but who were also close to being the dirtiest team I’ve seen getting unpunished for a long chain of successive fouls, including one which saw Sagna getting his leg broken. I now officially hate Norwich & hope they get relegated again at the earliest opportunity.
One of the biggest challenges during the aftermath of memory loss has been the loss of skills. I have spent such a significant amount of time relearning that nothing has felt familiar or comfortable.
I’m told they group together at night in the winter in locations that are slightly warmer and where there is light, and of course trees in which to roost. This makes campus an ideal location and this winter we saw streams of crows congregating at dusk, a la Hitchcock’s “The Birds,” flying to the front of Old Main to spend the night in the trees.
The indigenous people have not lost such awareness. In fact, it is this consciousness that drives them to continue to pay reverence to all life forces and see the sacredness of every thing and being. They have long believed that all life is interrelated, interconnected, and interdependent. Every person, place, condition, and thing affects every other person, place, condition and thing.
It involved pillows with me over them on our bed. That is not a position we have ever used in real life and I don't remember reading about it on anybody's blog in recent memory.
This spring break was a lot more low key than last year when we went to Hawaii, but it was still a great break. It started out with a snow day...that's right, not winter break, but spring break. We ended up with a little over 6" on snow to enjoy for the first few days of break, which was very unexpected.
Although that ending has been much discussed across the decades, I'd successfully managed to avoid any knowledge about the outcome until this point, and was drawn into the film's hypnotic rhythm unawares. Although less sweaty than films like The Window or Rear Window -- the window in question here is of a different order, but still, what is it about windows in New York? -- it's very much a classic of the New York summertime, with unexpected occurrences multiplying in the humidity.
THEN if you have instagram with tilt shift effect you can really enjoy yourself!
Today’s probably not a normal day, because I haven’t done a stroke of work yet and it’s after lunch! But that’s because I went into town to buy exercise gear. I live in black trousers, but I don’t actually own jogging bottoms. I have some nice stuff now, thanks to M&S. Couldn’t find a top I liked – I wanted something baggy, and all the women’s stuff seems to be clingy, so I’m going to take up DH’s offer of letting me borrow one of his. Bought a swim bag, too, so can return lovely daughter’s to her. (Bless her - she lent it to me this morning so I didn't have to use a carrier bag!) Bought a nice new swim towel, too, to inspire me (think daughter might try and pinch that). So now I’m all organised. The plan from today is: mens sana in corpore sano. (Already had the first – cough, or as much as a novelist does – but the second… that’s my target.)
Rules and Restrictions (AKA the fine print):
Race record: Starts 21; 1st: 6; 2nd: 5; 3rd: 5; Win & Place Prize Money: £296,500
This empire has been brutally conquering and colonizing territory since the fall of Rome. However, it has only gained an American face in the last century. The United States quickly emerged as the world’s “superpower” primarily through its economic might. For some time, many believed the U.S. to be a shining example of economic freedom for other nations to emulate. Indeed, America was eager to promote “economic freedom” globally to open new markets for U.S.-based corporations.
Cigarettes and alcohol make good nurses. An hour’s vigorous application and Gavroche had the tears and shakes under control. She sat scrunched tight on the motel bed, her fingers kneading the candlewick.
I think Jenny might be right, it’s not that I’m OCD, I mean I don’t have to switch lights on or off, or never step on cracks (although if I do step on a crack, I try to make my other foot step on crack too, just to even it out), but I’m not obsessive, I just prefer things a certain way. But there are a few things that really bug me:
Austerity isn’t a consequence of reduced government spending but of other government actions – taxes that are too high, interest rates that are too low, running the Royal Mint’s printing presses at full whack and failing to cut spending. Yes that’s right – failing to cut spending.
I used a nutrition calculator to compare 1 Cup of Wonder Flour with 1 Cup of White Flour. You can see that wonder flour has fewer calories per serving, more potassium, fewer carbohydrates, a LOT more dietary fiber (really good for you!). Of course white flour is enriched so it has some good things in there for you, but you really are missing all the fiber!
Thirty-One is not MY business, it is my FAMILY’S business. My husband is a HOTtie (Husband of Thirty-One) and supports me 100% even when that means helping me put labels on catalogs in the middle of the night! My children of course carry Thirty-One wherever they go and my oldest especially loves to tell everyone about Thirty-One and will tell them what they need to buy! My girls help sort orders when they come in, they help stamp order forms, label catalogs, etc. It doesn’t hurt that they know that our upcoming trip to Disney is being paid for by Thirty-One Dream Rewards!
My flavor of the week,
In Britain, Hundreds and Thousands are merely Sprinkles. Little candy coated bits of sugar that are used to decorate and adorn cakes, cookies, and even buttered slices of bread for fairy tea parties. Sprinkles add pop to our ice cream sundaes, sparkle to our rice krispie treats, and imagination to every dessert they touch.
God created the garden, which contained both the Tree of Life and Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil (2:8-9).
The lunch counter. Where you will be surrounded by chow-downers. Employees who only have an hour and their spouses work across town and so they — like you — will be alone.
6. Don’t do it alone!
Abodah Zarah 67b . "The vessels of Gentiles, do they not impart a worsened flavour to the food cooked in them?"
The amount of time that I spend in Greece each year seems to be increasing and just this year it will sum up to six weeks. This also means dramatically increased amount of time spent over a Greek frappe someplace in the shade, letting my thoughts carry me away. And, curiously, weird and diverse thoughts tend to originate or at least pass through my brain over numerous frappes here in Greece, from taking radical steps into the unknown, to intercultural theories or revelations of the secret of Greek men. I am starting to believe good old Greek philosophers drank a lot of frappe as well.
And, have you had a chance to check out the new website for the Blood of Eden series? I have to admit that I had to watch the trailer multiple times before I figured out the password to get in to see the exclusive items which was not a hardship. In fact, I had a few people watching it with me and trying to count the Blood of Eden symbols.
Todd Beamer, 32, Cranbury, N.J.
Justice and peace has, in the U.K., often been interpreted as ‘soft’ issues, that the middle classes can protest safely, for example, nuclear weapons and their disarmament, or ecological issues. I call them ‘soft’ because they do not impact our daily lives, even though we live in the shadow of nuclear destruction and environmental pollution (I am suspicious of ‘Climate Change’ being treated as a pseudo-religion, one which supplants the Gospel in the minds of too many Catholics and Christians; the only unforgiveable sin for them seems to be one’s ‘carbon footprint’). The things which do impact our daily lives are abortion, employment, just wages, euthanasia, the poison of contraception, and the erosion of both marriage and the family.
As always, feel free to share the information from this blog with others. Reprint it, forward it and include it in your newsletter — all I ask is that you give me credit and include a link to the blog. Thanks.
Lee and Ditko's Amazing Spider-Man focused on a hyper-kinetic depiction of the frenzy and constant bafflement of adolescence. Forty years later, McKeever and Miyazawa reworked much of the same material, adding the character of Mary Jane Watson to the Spider-Man haunted Midtown High School while emphasising the claustrophobia and charm, longing and loneliness of teenage suburban life. Where Peter Parker's super-powers allowed him to regularly escape his hometown for Manhattan Island, Mary Jane's existence is one in which the supposedly remarkable is only seen as from the other end of the telescope. Occasionally Spider-Man is glimpsed leaping over the neighbourhood's rooftops, an inexplicable presence intruding into a life of coffee shops, classrooms and Saturday jobs. In that, he's a symbol of all the romance and danger which Mary Jane's day-to-day life can't possibly deliver, just as the initially ghostly presence of the socially-peripheral, perpetually-bullied Peter Parker suggests the possibility of the remarkable hiding in the plain sight of the mundane. Spider-Man Loves Mary Jane is a beautifully restrained and heartfelt evocation of the life of an uncertain young woman on the cusp of adulthood. Just as Lee and Ditko did, McKeever and Miyazawa put the figure of the superhero to use in the service of a story that's concerned with profoundly human, essentially typical experiences. It's a measure of how unimaginative Marvel can often be that there's never been a whisper in recent years of a television adaptation of the series. How better to reach out beyond the Rump?
BALDWINSVILLE, NY — A Nova Scotia brewery that has been around for 191 years finally has entered the United States, via New York.
If I had a dime for every time I heard that MLSP and iLead System are “too complicated”, well it would be a lot of dimes.
The steak was delicious, the frites were sinfully good and the BN just kept flowing. Not even the sight of a few ample-bellied, red-faced, extra-large human heart-attacks at nearby tables was enough to put us off our feast. We were in the throes of a BN bacchanalia - what's a few hardened arteries between friends?
Travelling through the forests and jungles of Vietnam is amazingly like watching the films I so loved in my youth. You almost expect hueys to come panelling over the horizon and hard bitten GI's to start shouting shit about DANANG and LV'S!
*David Shannon
In the past, I liked to think that I only needed God and his help when things in my life looked grim. That couldn’t have been farther from the truth. Not only was I letting myself believe that I had control of my life and that happiness was completely dependent on me, but I was cheating myself out of true joy that comes with trusting the Lord and walking with Him daily.
Introducing the ultimate PLR articles pack, this massive PLR articles pack includes more than 400,000 PLR articles, all included with full private label right license. This massive PLR articles pack is categorized in more than 950 folders on different niche topics, from marketing articles to topics like health & fitness,pets,marketing,medical, fashion,travel, finance, birthdays, herbs and many many more.
“I’m sorry”
Here are some of my favorite pics of my girls (a few years ago). Can you see the resemblance to the Kaela girls in my project?
It will be interesting other teams come forward with new Inerter or linked suspension solutions. The only problem is few teams patent their design to allow us such insight to their design.
See him surrounded by energy
And if somebody else ends up writing your query, make sure they are good at it!
She is dedicated to her work, admitting that the Judy R Clark production was just her, her two cats and a small studio space. “Work really hard”, was her advice for prospering within the fashion industry. Her drive to succeed is underpinned by her faith in her own creativity, saying “believe in what you are doing is great, even if you seem to be the only one who agrees, still believe!” She is an advocate for self belief, which seems to be what keeps her motivated and an aspiring entrepreneur.
Then after showers and a chance to revive ourselves we attempted to call a cab to go back into downtown for dinner. Last night of Jazz Fest…bad idea. We waited for 2 hours for a cab and eventually the younger set gave up and opted to eat in the room. The rest of us waited for the cab and then headed to Yo Mama’s, a strictly burger joint and well worth the escapade. You have got to try a Peanut Butter burger. Yum! Best burgers in NOLA! Then after a stroll through Bourbon St, we headed back for a good night’s sleep. Tomorrow is volunteering day. Pretty sure it is going to be awesome!
She claims to be horrified by the backlash she has experienced, especially online, as a result of these features. Twitter lights up angrily every time another bit of bluster from Brick finds its way onto the net and the newspaper’s hit counter probably goes into meltdown.
And ta-dah, I brought this baby back home!
I see the blue sky.
This morning the Supreme Court released it's opinion in Microsoft v. i4i, and provided "clean sweep" support (10-0) that patents may only be invalidated under "clear and convincing" evidence.
You spend so much time in this room, so you need a space that works for both adults and small people. During the day, push back sofas so little ones have maximum toddling space, then for cosy TV watching in the evening, move them into more social positions. There’s no need to get rid of your gorgeous cream settees and armchairs, either - machine washable throws are your friends. To keep things safe, buy non slip rubber mats to go under your rugs and get padding and edge protectors for your tables.
Glimmer Mist and gesso. This was meant to be the "negative" version of a page from yesterday, but it did not come out as well as I hoped. I'm going to try something similar soon, but with dictionary paper. So don't think you're seeing double :-):
this stunning combination of mossy green with cream trim; I love
3. When you receive the award,
I think because I spent so many years in overwhelming adrenaline cascading fear, I kind of felt that all I could do was deal with myself. I thought that if I could just get myself happy, then I could get on with the business of giving a fuck about any one else. But this is about as fulfilling as porn when really what someone is crying out for is love. Connection. Something to make your heart burst and scream and let go and trust and pray and know that wow life is fucking amazing after all. The fairy Godmother was not a psychotic narcissistic bitch out to get you. She was right. You are the fairy tale and life is there to give you all its incredible magic if you can only find the courage to … connect.
I Am is thought provoking, inspiring, uplifting and gives us hope for the human race. I hope more people see this film and take its message to heart. Here is a link to their website with more information.
Being away from Matt is hard. Really hard. I know this one shouldn't surprise me, but it has. I knew being apart for this year would be hard, but I counted on weekend visits to reenergize me and get me going. I consider myself to be a strong independent woman, and I've never wanted to rely on a man (or anyone else for that matter) for happiness or strength. I of course love that Matt contributes to my happiness and strength, but prior to internship, I didn't really like the idea of relying on him for those things. But after the past 6 months, I've calmed down about that and realized that it is ok to rely on your partner to be a source of energy and joy. Not my only source of course, but a big one. Matt is definitely a big support, and being apart has taught me that's not just okay...that's totally awesome.
To its credit, UNESCO does have an Ethics Office, which in its 2009-2010 annual report bluntly noted “a failure by employees at all levels to take responsibility for their work.” That’s no surprise, given the findings in the same report that many of UNESCO’s employees don’t know what they are supposed to be doing. The Ethics Office further reported receiving “more and more complaints” about UNESCO employees “inappropriately using their diplomatic immunity” to show “non-respect of private legal and financial obligations.” In other words, they were abusing UN privileges to break local laws.
"Mooooooommmm! Somebody's out here with a goat."
Gluconic acid strengthens the walls of the gut in order to combat yeast
rushonrock: How do you feel about the result of the upcoming Tränenherz? Did all go according to plan?
Ok fall...I'm waiting!
humanitarian concerns related to the situation of the “Cuban five”.
The movie Dazed and Confused is one of the best movies ever made in my humble but factually correct opinion. I watch it two or three times a year while enjoying adult beverages and you should do the same. And it has probably the best soundtrack of any movie.
ps: I just discovered this website that flashes through blogs to promote them, a creative endeavor all free by one person. It’s called http://alphainventions.com/ It never fails to amaze me the sense of community and helping that so much of the internet is based upon… a large village supporting each other.
It truly was a wonderful Mother's Day. I didn't spend a majority of it with my kids, but I spent a good portion of Friday and most of Saturday with them.
Money for Jobs and Education!
With the noticeable exception of a female character in a sarong, Satan and I are doing our best Hope and Crosby as we get on The Road to Cincinnati. I am leaving Fredericksburg today, and, after a brief visit to Eola, I will meet Satan at his parents' home near Coleman. From there, in the morning, we head to somewhere in the vicinity of Lynchburg, Tennessee. I will update on the road!
Speaking of fifteen years ago, the other day I ran into a woman I have not seen since we lived in Minnesota before. It is so weird how that can happen in a very small town, where I just went to pick up a few grocery coupon items while the girls were at music lessons. You know how it is. We should always dress to represent our Saviour, but there are times when we just need to run out for a minute to grab something, and we're hoping to slip in and out of the store or post office without being seen. In most cases, the chance that you will not be noticed is inversely proportional how bad you look. If the person is important to you, you will look like something that crawled out from under a rock, just this one time. This woman looked exactly the same as she did fifteen years ago. She was wearing no make-up, but it didn't matter -- she looked youthful and slender and beautiful. I'm sure I look the same, too, except for an additional 25 pounds, a pair of dark circles and some wrinkles... But miracle of miracles! This ONE TIME when I ran into someone who knows me, I had a bit of make-up on and it was not an epic bad hair day. Isn't that just a blessing?? I think that's a blessing. :) (You have to count the small things, too.)
What I'm keeping:
In summary, if you have enough faith there is no act that you could not perform. That is the more faith, the more extreme the acts can be. (That’s why I am very afraid of people of faith, having access to weapons).
I would first like to start out by saying, I DO NOT HUNT. I was only there because Chipper Jones was signing which thanks to Austin for telling me about it I would have never known about it. My dad and I went down to the show and we walked through the place to get to Chipper. We got to him and there were 3 people yes 3 people in front of us waiting for him. I walk up to him and got him to sign an autograph bat:
that knows just how it wants to burn
Often these days, according to , company-specific apps need to be developed. And with the proliferation of company’s specializing in app development these days, this can be done quickly and easily – but it also comes with a price. So again, plan accordingly.
Pull the tape so it is straight out but don't pull it so tight that it pulls it up off the floor and pulls up the pin. Take a marker and put it at the 1" end of the tape. I just poke mine through the little hole in the metal tip. Then draw an arc across the paper, making sure to keep the tape straight.
momentous sadness
“They are living organisms.”
Liz Wirth: You don't know what you're talking about.
Most of the machines were beyond me but we did get to see yeast up close and personal. We also saw the “coolest” place in the brewery: the cryogenic freezer that preserves yeast samples for the next millenium. After swabbing something for analysis (I ran it across the rim of my water bottle) it was time for some more beverages.
We returned to Newcastle quite soon, for I was then retired.
Good new is that there were no crispy critters and that was the only building destroyed. Bad news is that I never got to see how cool that hidden room was actually constructed or busted anyone. Better luck next time.
Row 1- ch4, sc in 2nd ch from hook and each across (3)
So the Father is God, the Son is God: and the Holy Spirit is God.
Marche clumsily interprets this,
It’s like this: Be a save driver. If you follow that one rule, you’ll use turn signals properly, watch where you’re driving, stay a safe distance between cars, hang up the cell phone, stay within the lines, stop at traffic lights, stop at stop signs, and stay within the speed limit. But in our legalistic society, we can’t have that one rule. We have to have a hundred individual rules because we can’t rightfully interpret the one simple rule.
All of these memories are mine, I hope memory hasn't twisted too severe. I'm sure the people reading this know of the occasions and the beer I'm speaking about. To them, I raise my glass. All of the shared times, the good beers and the bad ones, to the hangovers and all the greasy breakfasts shared.
that for the first time in weeks, I am really alone.
Traffic officers lay in wait before stopping the Lexus on the M90, near Perth. Computer checks found the three passengers were known to Midland police, although the dancer had no criminal record and claimed she had no idea about their pasts.
1 faces
That's all the deepness I can handle this morning.
It’s rightly said, every failed relation, every mistake we make isn’t life/time wasted but an important lesson learnt. I too have learnt many lessons and have (hopefully) started working on changing myself to adapt better to the changed circumstances.
This new information seems to confirm my initial thought that he was a Catholic Pole and an ethnic German. Much like some people in the US today are culturally Mexican (or any other ethnic group) but are US citizens.
Would our hearts contain the overwhelming awe and wonder of such a sight?
Instead, Abdulmutallab is dispatched to some Detroit-area jail and immediately lawyered up. At which point -- surprise! -- he stops talking.
The first half of the Lord’s Prayer explores what it means to love God through prayer. God is addressed as “our Father”, not simply a god we wish to do business with. We long to see his name honored and worshiped (“hallowed be your name”). We align our will to God’s will by praying for God’s kingdom to come to earth so that his will be obeyed on earth just as it is in heaven. When you love someone, you begin to desire what they desire.
Today, not so far from the shore, I saw a fisherman in a wet suit casting his line from a point in the surf where the waves were breaking just below his chest. I stood there watching him, the sunshine fading slowing over the western hills in Newport, both of us bathed in amber-yellow light. To me, he was living perfectly, dwelling in the energy of the crashing surf; while I was living passively, watching safely from a position just steps away from where the ebbing tide recedes.
“You might have a problem. I guess I misunderstood you,” Without the manager listening, I continued, “The coolers they kept those shakes in waiting for you were about 30 degrees, but not your cooler.”
“This capstone meteorology course has been quite a large success,” he said. “Perhaps the success can be measured by great forecasting and travel decisions that get us to the storms on time. However, the majority of students come home from this trip stating that they have learned more in this one class then they have since they started college, and that is my overarching goal for this class.”
I told him I admired his name and he explained that he was not born with it. He had been walking one day when a newspaper was blown by the wind against his leg. He picked it up and saw an obituary column. A boy had died when he was less than a year old and his name had been “Zachariah Zarathustra Jones.” The name was too beautiful to waste so he had decided to use it.
Need to balance both sides, otherwise you get a physical illness
As a child who was so often carried away , metaphorically, by drawing, naturally I was entranced by a little Boy named Simon, who , in fact, did draw things that came to life. I am still enchanted by the power of art and creation.There truly is something magical about envisioning something and seeing it come to fruition. I had this thought when poring through some cake sketches. To see your concept, or even a germ of a concept actually materialize still has the power to amaze me.
Sincerely, Your humble host. Ben.
“It’s rather stuffy in here, isn’t it?”
Refined sugars and grains.
Hopes and dreams
April 27 - Yvette Vickers, model (Playboy) and actress ("Attack of the 50 Foot Woman"), 82
Mary Heussenstamm's career began in nursing, but she always had an interest in art and frequently sketched pencil drawings of her patients. Upon her retirement at the age of 59, she began painting watercolors, using multiethnic models on the streets of Los Angeles as subjects. I discovered her book featuring 100 of these watercolor portraits and I immediately knew this collection had to be mine in spite of how pricey it was. I was drawn to her incredible ability to depict the play of light and shadow upon different faces, and the expressions she was able to capture in less than an hour for each portrait. The simple cleanliness of her paintings and her masterful use of color truly left me in awe. Heussenstamm passed away in 2005 from Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease.
“The Vermilion City Recreation Department is accepting baseball and softball registration forms for anyone under the age of 15. Applications are available in the high school main office. The deadline to submit your application is April 27th.”
Propane grills are slightly more expensive, starting around $100 dollars.
Thanks for sticking by me through this. And honestly, I'm really okay. Love to you all.
There are things at which it excels, such as getting into places that a router can't reach. Scratch stock also enables you to create your own profiles and saves you from having to buy expensive router bits.
Zombies, as you may have learned from William Seabrook’s writings or the movies, are Haitians who have died only to be raised from the grave and harnessed to plows which they pull forever after. Anyway, that’s the story.
Protect your phone with award-winning security & antivirus from Lookout
Previous studies have shown that climate change, the widely-accepted theory that man-made carbon emissions are causing the world to grow warmer, is very unpopular among conservatives, and especially white conservative males. In 2008, half of all conservatives believed in climate change. By 2010, only a third did, compared to more than 70 percent of liberals, according to a Gallup poll.
I thought I was only going to make the one Easter card this year, but then decided to make one for each of the two babies in the family. Both cards feature a lovely illustration from Beatrix Potter's The Tale of Benjamin Bunny.
I think my story is similar to your story
While I was working on them I learned "teatime" in the UK also refers to mealtime. I always thought it was the actual teatime at 5pm, you know, the one with delicious cookies and biscuits, hee! Anyway, this goes to show you that we learn something new everyday.
I start to worry about things, because the peace in my tired mind had vacated hours ago. One anxious thought leads to another until the soundtrack to my mind goes something like this:
Let’s face it, even something like a paper cut, would wear you down if the pain never, ever stopped, and was with you for years.
My Terrain hexagon-flower quilt is almost almost finished and I'm already thinking about what project to move on to next. I've already resolved that I'm not going to start any new crafts this year, so that narrows it down to finishing off a UFO.
Annyeonghasseyo!*bow*
They floated for days until they found a deserted island. Food was not abundant for the pair who weakened daily. They survived for eighteen months until only one was rescued.
Joss Whedan’s “The Avengers” is a premise that directly gets to the point without wasting even a single frame. The earth is being attacked by a force that is out of this world, the freedom of the human race is in jeopardy, the director of S.H.I.E.L.D., a secret military law-enforcement agency, reactivates the ‘Avengers’ initiative. All the super heroes of the world brought together in a team that will protect the earth from a situation never seen or experienced before. And of course, in the climax, a city that has been destroyed in x- amount of films before (by aliens, monsters and nature), is once again torn apart in an effort to stop extra terrestrial forces to enter our world.
An unusual occurrence took place at the M. Strelnikov border outpost. At night, a border patrol saw a two-metre-tall creature, moving ahead on two legs, similar to descriptions of the yeti - the abominable snowman.
And to answer the second part of your question – I love that a 25-year-old with such talent and potential has her own show on HBO. Age isn’t important to me. All I care about is that the creator have a strong voice. Lena certainly has that. And better tattoos than Diablo Cody.
One-Pot Option: For delicious and quick one-pot meal add one pound of diced chicken breast (or one pound of peeled de-veined shrimp) in with the oil and ramps in Step 5, and saute till cooked through. Then return drained pasta mixture and continue recipe.
I love reading the book of Proverbs and teaching it to my children. This particular verse really got my Older children’s attention. My 7 and 9 year old had light bulb moments after coming across this verse.
I was outside doing yard work as always , since it is spring. I just got my patio cleaned off from winter and fall leaves and branches . Then it stormed again last weelend and then I had more tree branches and those twirle things , we use to call them helicopters.
I used purple and green buttons to match her purple and green dresses, and the
When we began this project as a family, I slowly started transitioning Beckett to organic. When she moved into a big girl bed, we snagged an organic mattress and wrapped it in an organic mattress cover. For Camden, we purchased organic bassinet sheets, but couldn’t stomach the investment of an entire organic bassinet made from natural materials. We had a perfectly good one (and consignment store find I might add!) that Beckett had used. But, the mattress was dreadful. It was a horrendous piece of foam lined with a PVC-based waterproof covering. The thickness was less than half an inch and it was a sorry excuse for any baby’s sleep surface. I didn’t know what the solution was.
Street Att for me was and Still is and should remain pure. It is important for a society to have pacific and artistic manifestations and expression of disapproval. It is safe and healthy for all of us. A society that has an extended omogeneic thought is and seemes only proceeding to intellettual and human death. Were everything and everyone has a prize nothing a value. Like a body without antibodies and without a soul.
The Financial Times doesn't review poetry all that often, but it had George Pendle review Alien vs. Predator by Michael Robbins (Penguin, 2012), a book I have not yet read, and intend to. This is a review of that review - or rather, a brief lament at so many of the assumptions and lazy claims made in it. The main problem for me is Pendle's claim is that this collection "could take poetry to a new readership" because of its "ephemeral appreciation of pop culture" and that this pop culture poetry, that references "rap", is like "Wallace Stevens playing Xbox". Paul Muldoon and John Ashbery and Ginsberg are cited as presiding spirits. Blogs and tweets are mentioned. It is a "gory B-movie mash-up" with a "bouncing, colloquial firestorm of pop and poetical reference". Sigh.
While we get a lot of feedback on the general fabulousness of our staff from the TV show, far and away the number one most talked about thing is The Orangutan Cake. Seeing this little guy staring out at us from the kitchen was just gob-smacking and I don't think there was one of us who wasn't a little devastated at the thought of him being cut up and eaten! Earlier in the year,
on poor people because it’s something
-Now that I have the kitchen done, my next mission is the hall bathroom, my bathroom and my bedroom. All need new paint. Am I getting paid? No. Fuck that. Someone should be paying me!
These peppers are steamed before stuffing and baking, which creates a soft, sweet pepper that simply melts in your mouth. The smooth, creamy meat and rice filling is contrasted nicely with a crunchy topping of bread crumbs and cheese. Paired with a salad draped in roasted red pepper dressing, you have a healthy and flavorful meal, a well-matched competitor for that slice of chocolate cake.
It was properly actually hot today. Even the smallest bars suddenly had tables and chairs outside, like early blossoms. My afternoon park (Cinquantenaire) was full of frisbee-ers, tightrope-walkers, and lots of normal people too.
One of the three President Obama clones held a press conference and admitted that he had signed an executive order that allows the government t clone any law enforcement officer or member of the military who is deemed a high risk to national security.
I have a friend, Gina, who has become a real life sewing mentor of sorts. She helped me learn how to thread Sergio this past January, and she helped me put some cuffs on a project this past month (which I haven't featured yet because of the A-Z challenge theme going on).
to an image using my Used Canvas textures which are some hefty downloads in MBs.
We have nothing
Joey Johnson.
Feeling really happy, I decided to do the head (toilet). It’s new. I had poured water and vinegar down it a while back to clean and test it out and it leaked at the output. I undid the outlet tube and found a bunch of salt(?) chippings and a broken elbow! You can’t believe how happy I am to have found this before actually “using” this thing. Whoever installed it deserves to find a “dump” on his front door step!
Me: Jake Gyllenhall? Really? He's such a pussy.
See you Tuesday. Enjoy the Labor Day weekend.
Today there is so much more to create excitement – swimming lessons, little league baseball, after-school activities, sports events, to say nothing of personal diversions like cell phones, DVDs, texting devices, and even television and the Internet.
The Obama FDS “already had issued decisions advancing more than 500 species toward potential new protections under the Endangered Species Act.” Among the species selected for protection were 35 snails from Nevada’s Great Basin, 82 crawfish from the Southeast, 99 Hawaiian plants and “a motley cast of butterflies, birds, fish, beetles, frogs, lizards, mussels and more from every corner of the country.”
2. decorate with eyes, nose, mouth and ears.
The image prints at the bottom of the page (I usually size it to 4 inches) and this allows me to fold my paper in half. I then trim the paper down to 5x7 inches so that it fits in a normal size envelope....all done.
So watch out. A destroyed educational system, a desiccated economy, and a debauched democracy are coming soon to a school district near you.
I am a genius.
Had you dropped me a letter
Textured - that does have a lot of connotations. Firstly the visual in this case of the “Photo Challenge”. It is the tactile quality of a surface or article, it is the culture of something ie to do with religion or the arts or music etc. It is the general structure of something and it is what we feel, see and hear with the sense of touch, site and sound that allows us to interpret the reality with these senses.
No, the opening verse from ‘Power’:
“The election will be on Aug. 14.”
imagination is a helpful ally in this endeavor. if you are staying home, and the home is not damaged, you are in good shape. but what if you are on the road or forced to take to the hills when calamity strikes? do you have ponchos or 2 shelter halves to make a tent with? do you have a bivvy sack, sleeping mats and bags? do you have a hatchet to help you build a lean to or debris shelter? remember, if things really go to shit, others will have taken to the hills also, and will be looking for obvious shelter too, such as YOUR home. how will you defend it and your food and water stores?
The good news is that he has not worsened!! He is still on a moderatley low amount of thickening and he tolerates it. The situation could be much worse. I hold on to that fact and thank God that while we have to deal with daily stuggles and complications, we are blessed to not be dealt even more difficult cards. All in all it was a good morning/afternoon birthday. Josh spent it happy, healthy and entertained. He ran the halls of the hospital with his Buzz Lightyear flip flops, played the lobby piano, watched some Disney, colored, had his picutre taken and played some more! I don't think the kid minded... not too shabby!
Purpose of the Program
The tag itself was from VERY heavy black cardstock. I added glimmer mist, and then sponged on some purple and green. Once I had all that done I VersaMarked it and then Clear Embossed it. It has a really cool effect in person. You can kind of see the swirly colors here, but not as well. The Cheshire Cat image was colored with RV62, 66, 69 and BV00, 01, 02, 04. Over the top of it I added Crystal Effects to make it more sturdy. The tag is layered and in the end I added these picks I found in the Wedding Area of Hobby Lobby. There is not as much difference in the purple on the tulle compared to the purple on the cat. Again - I NEED to work on my picture taking skills.SIGH.
"Possibly from the close blades of a John Deere? Quite a low setting?"
We also have the light of life. We are told in Matthew 5:14-15, we “are the light of the world. A city on a hill cannot be hidden. Neither do people light a lamp and put it under a bowl. Instead they put it on a stand, and it gives light to everyone in the house.”
Tonight’s soundtrack included the mighty Power Quest, Mad Max, Big Country, Donnie Vie and Slam Cartel.
I know this, but I will forget it each and every time. This . . . this wilderness is my refining, the giving up of my will for His, my life for His, my ways for His.
Here is where I finally realized that there was a period of time where no on in the world knew where my child was and what he was doing.
Thyme tea, rich in volatile oils, minerals, beneficial phenols and flavonoids, is a healthy beverage choice. One of the popular culinary herb plants, thyme is native to Southern Europe and Mediterranean regions.
That skirt. Shit. It’s like she’s tellin’ us to come and get it. Gotta get me a piece of the action or I’ll die a fucking monk.
We had planned to go to the rifle range today - when we went to bed, the forecast called for cloudy and breezy with a "30% chance of rain after 11AM". When the crazy cat woke me for breakfast at 6:30, I could hear the rain dripping off the roof. When I got out of bed for good, it was really raining hard. We need the inch of rain we got, but I could use some range time. It has rained virtually all day.
2) Being able to speak into a box in the palm of your hand and talk to another person on the other side of the planet, in a language that you can’t understand, and have the box translate for you.
Her name was Sonya, and she worked as a barmaid at the Looking-Glass Cafe, where I sometimes go to escape and evade and avoid and elude the desperation and desolation of my lonely existence. Ah, how shall I describe Sonya? She was as lovely as the dawn, as beautiful as the dusk, and as sweet as a mango. And she had a nice smile. I was smitten.
(Yet a mournful wail and low sob I fancied I heard through the dark,
@Flexfokus1
The dock is huge and cement, and is the best place to get a suntan.
There was all that ghastly nonsense with babies, too. They were expected to come forth with the regularity of a harvest, the fruits of plantings provoked more by a father’s pleasure than a mother’s desire to continue her beloved miscreant’s line. Horrible, horrible, Mary-Emma thought as she imagined great globes of muslin-swathed bellies emptying their contents into the world amid a violent stew of noise and mess. No, no man would do that to her. She was not to be used in that fashion. She was not to be used at all.
From one of his own. In the words of Camille Paglia, in her in her response to a reader on Salon.com "Bow-ow-ow: Obama's painful missteps"
Mark: You're older than I am. Just so you know.
I'm that mom who is my children's friend.
Asking heaven above me, for an angel to love me
I tell you I want you close to me
Sunday's are never dull at Cloverdale's Saved by Grace Baptist Church.
Floating around the room.
5:07: We arrive home. I make dinner for myself while trying to decide what everyone else is going to eat. I'm on a very specific food plan in an attempt to lose some of my chubbiness.
I have shown you the text…tomorrow I will tell you a story.
It was lovely being in St Andrews again, the noodle bar is great! My only regret is that I couldn't stay to hear Kathleen Jamie read, one of these days I get to hear her.
lame new introduction line? yeah I know. Well it feels like it’s been forever since I posted on this blog, and to that I apologize. I’m sorry. I’ve been so caught up with life, I’ve got my finals in two weeks and I haven’t even started revising. I have a test tomorrow, math test. I’ve studied for that already but I’m still skeptical about it. Well anyhoo, on to the tech!
If you outline exactly what your goals are, you will—with time—begin to see results that translate into dollars for your firm. If you do not set and achieve your goals on an ongoing basis, the benefits of social media will be less than what you want.
YEAST PRESS - 'This is not being used meantime, and until beers are all right, I have advised its disuse. When things are going well, and probably about the month of November when the cold weather is with us, I think it would then be very advisable to have it started up, as it means a big saving of duty free beer, the beer contained in yeast being equal to 1 to 2% and duty free at that, means a large saving per annum if properly pressed at the right time.'"
Scientists used hypnosis, so we’d think the globe is hotter
1 1/4 cups Graham Cracker Crumbs (I used store bought crumbs)
(I always find it amusing when food writers refer to the person eating with them as their “companion.” It sounds kind of naughty and clandestine. Like maybe the NY Times food critic takes a call girl out for dinner on the paper’s dime.)
Lake Tahoe is my happy place, it is one place were I can truly relax & soak in the beauty around me. And, I read ALL 3 Hunger Games Books while I was gone. SO good!!! I couldn't put them down. Can't wait to see the movie!
The Doomsdayers have nothing left to say
Kaisercraft Droplets- Clear and Pink.
Ripper
Thanks for stopping by! Let me know if you end up trying this - I would love to see your results.
As well as providing a well-set stage for my recently completed YA fantasy, Glancing Through the Glimmer, Howth has served as a venue for many events in Irish myth and history. Finn MacCool and his Fianna (the watchers of the coast, the guardians of the shore) reportedly had one of their many outposts up on the cliffs. Sixteenth century Pirate Queen Grace O’Malley paid Howth an outrageous and memorable visit in 1576 (see my previous post, Howth Therapy). And in 1914, author and Irish patriot Robert Erskine Childers smuggled rifles and ammunition for the Irish Volunteers into Howth Harbor aboard his famous yacht, the Asgard.
Those words are so true- we just need hearts open to God, and He can use us, whoever we are.
I like to think I’m a free spirit, I’d do anything at least once and I have an adventurous heart, so I know in the time I’ve got I will do some crazy stuff, that’s probably why my bucket list has things that are beyond my control – boring, I know, but hey, all other things like jumping out of a plane (which I’ve already done) and seeing the world’s wonders are great, but if it just doesn’t happen then let’s just say I won’t be rolling in my grave.
This thinking ahead, understanding limitations, working through the rules and how to get what she wants within the limitations of the rules... It's just amazing to me to watch. Instead of freaking out about wanting to watch a show in the family room, she now understands that if it's not on TV or On Demand, we have to watch it up in my room where it's recorded. Or maybe it's not recorded and she simply has to wait until it comes on later. She GETS it. She understands and doesn't freak out.
A great self help idea which can help you alter your every day life is to begin training yoga exercise. Exercising yoga is the best way to get in good shape and it’s also very therapeutic. You can even find forms of yoga exercises that aim that will help you get more in contact with on your own.
I took a little trip to the library with my niece and just like Jim Dales quote stated, it was an adventure back to my childhood.. The visit however... was to entertain my niece but I found it just as, or even more entertaining then she did.... Here's why?
How much food and water should I pack?
Backwards Loop Cast On Technique: (You can either cast on this way or the regular way, but I thought it would be nice to learn a new technique).
Dishwashers galore!
Don't get me wrong, I actually don't mind folding laundry! Really. I just hate putting it away. I digress.
But this one had very nice eyeshadow on today. It was her first visit to the brand spankin' new California Academy of Sciences, practically in her backyard, in Golden Gate Park. She thought this outing was definitely worth dressing up for.
But the lyrics are worth paying attention to as well, she says. They’re often written by respected poets, and they take on issues like class, poverty and politics — even topics as touchy as domestic terrorism.
Troy: What started in the 60s, when Hustler and Playboy hit the market, has progressed to what we have online today. And with the Internet, you don’t even have to be ashamed.
“The fact of the matter is unless the President of the United states is going to engage in a serious conversation about illegal immigration reform, there will be none.South Carolinians and the South Carolina government must make the best decisions in the interest of the people. At the end of the day the 14th amendment is probably were we find the major controversy over the immigration legislation whether it’s at the state level of federal level.”
Kriezler feels sure that the killer is not insane. But, he needs to meet the killer and talk with him before deciding if he is insane or not. He believes that something occured in the killers childhood that made him this way. Therefore, Kreizler is driven to find him so that he can make an effort to answer this age old question. Is this killer insane or just evil?
3. Buckingham/Nicks version.
Happy third anniversary to Handmade Tales! Yes, its true, its the third anniversary of this here blog!
This is the first time I’ve seen a transvidual subject turn into a subject, speak, and then dissolve in this way. Anyone can speak for the group, it’s a radically distributed, transvidual networked political subject. And yet it’s remarkably low-tech. While I’m sure that the human mic has existed before in history, likely invented and reinvented as need be, I’m not sure if has ever been distributed and spontaneous like this. Perhaps we needed the internet and today’s networked world to help us to see these potentials. But in a moment of crisis, this protester just said ‘mic check!,’ and in the age of crowdsourcing ideas and revolution-by-twitter, no-one had to say anything more, people just intuitively knew what to do.
Too “disappointed” to realize time on earth is too short,
moves ever closer to its end.
The cost will be $65 per person, excluding tax and gratuity, and reservations are required. The Craft Beer at Chifa Dinner Series will continue this winter with the brothers from Troegs Brewing Co on Thursday, December 16 and Garrett Oliver from Brooklyn Brewery on Thursday, January 20.
Are we nearly there yet?
Last week I bought what was dubbed an "indoor bulb garden" - no blooms, just greenery and buds. A lot like the one shown in the photo at the top of this post, it now has three mini-daffodils with more to come, one blue hyacinth and one in bud, and something very mysterious in bud that I can't wait to see. It may not be spring outdoors, but it is indoors!
The BBC reported his name.
Don’t think that Delany doesn’t know that. Gene Smith sure does.
Why start?
but for now, heres the valentines owl...
1288 D-I/23/1998. Television interview with Mike Flannery, on William J. Clinton’s problems, Channel 2, Chicago, Illinois. See Item C-1998(11), above, p. 109, n. 21. See, also, Items C-1998(6) and C-1998(7), above, and Item E-IX/10/1998, below.
On behalf of Council Member James, we express our gratitude towards the Fulton Street BID Steering Committee, Pratt Area Community Council, numerous local business owners, and Mayor Bloomberg in assisting the efforts to strengthen Clinton Hill/Fort Greene's vibrant business community.
I always accepted stances as just being another layer of detail in the forms; I could see where some transitions had stances that rationally coincided with the technique, but most of the time I found the various stances to be pure added detail to a form.
Using John Boos Cutting Boards To Avoid Food Poisoning
He gets Inori, takes her sword out, saves the day, blah blah blah.
Water spirits, moon maidens, haunted pianos, headless revenants, and an invincible terrapin that lives under the mountains. None of these distract James Holtzclaw from his employer’s mission: to turn the fading gold-rush town of Auraria, GA, into a first-class resort and drown its fortunes below a man-made lake. But when Auraria’s peculiar people and problematic ghosts collide with his own rival ambitions, Holtzclaw must decide what he will save and what will be washed away.
My husband had slowly been hacking away at these vines that week and I hadn’t even noticed. So imagine my surprise when the weather turned warm that Saturday and I found a barbecue grill in the yard.
This can be a difficult business and sometimes a depressing business. So for two days, I get to be more encouraging than I normally am, which is actually more my general nature. In those two days, I haven’t read your work in advance; I don’t know anything about you except what you tell me, and you know what? I can’t tell anything from that. Someone who has a poised, polished pitch might be a terrible writer, and someone who’s nervous as anything might be a genius on the page.
“Now the President is outraged because the GOP House leadership called his bluff and ended discussions with him because they deemed him an obstruction to any real solution to the debt crisis. He has been deemed a lame duck president. And he is angry now because he is being treated as such.
A few interesting points that came up in the following Q & A: Someone suggested that the sales of shortlisted books are not always good, but M J Hyland said that sales of her shortlisted book far outstrip that of her others, and keep doing so. In response to the idea that the best books stand the test of time and rise to the top anyway, she said that getting a prize is a great thing for an author, though, because authors need to eat and can very rarely make a living out of writing. On the idea that many winners don't stand the test of time, Vona Groarke made the point that we can hardly expect them to: in fact, we would be very lucky to get a truly remarkable book each decade, leave alone each year. Someone, Ian McGuire I think, commented that to invest in just two or three writers a year (which results from the prize culture) does not make for a healthy literature culture. Writers need to be given a chance to develop their careers, to produce non-prizewinning books at the start, and I think the implication was that a literary conversation dominated by prizes pushes publishers away from that. On the other hand (my notes tell me someone said), prizes could contribute to such a different kind of culture, but I don't recall anyone saying how. De Groot suggested that literary festivals bespeak a public desire to have the kind of conversation about books that was generally felt to be squeezed. Finally Festival Director Cathy Bolton asked what the panel felt about the online platform to which Ian McGuire saw that the literary discussion had moved. M J Hyland said she found it scary - she could be devastated by a bad Amazon review - but such democratisation and widening of the discussion had to be a good thing. Ian McGuire said that some of it was excellent, more objective than newspaper criticism which often consisted of writers reviewing each others' books, and one had to view it as part of the changing world of books.
The Bud brand has produced a few winners under the Bud Light name in the last few years. Bud Light Lime is a pretty refreshing summer beverage and Bud Light Wheat holds its own, but I’d never really go out of my way to get it.
When I heard people saying that today was the first day of Spring, the first thing I thought of was "Ooops -- I gotta get my Spring Reading Thing post ready." So -- a little late -- here we go:
And with the recipe below a bit of sweet,spice and all things nice have been added – even a bit of fruity crunch.
anyway, listen and tell me what he says.
So I browned my leftover chicken and bones with some sesame oil in my cast iron pot, added thinly sliced onions and chopped kimchi, and then covered it with water. Then I brought it to a boil and then let it simmer for over half an hour, then added a bit of fish sauce and scallions and allowed it to simmer for another 10-15 minutes.
2. Tim/SpastikMooss of the Great Sports Name HOF finally gets the package I owe him sent his way. I found a few great sports names, including one of his favorites (God Shamgod) in a '97-'98 Fleer set, and I threw in a couple relics because those are always useful (note to Tim: I don't think Cliff Floyd has a particularly great sports name, unless you count the fact that he shares a first name with Bill Cosby's best character, and you know, with the hippin' and hoppin' and bippin' and boppin', the kids don't know what the jazz...is all about!
The 3rd was nasty, really nasty.
The party itself was a roving one, which seems the norm on these kinds of events: you start at a bar, go to a house party, then to a club, then to another bar, and so on. I don’t even remember the places we ended up visiting because there were so many and I lost my bearings after about the third place. Ben would just say, “Cool, we’re going to go and meet X and Y at Z. Taxi!” And we’d be off. Needless to say, it was an epic night that only ended in the wee hours of the morning. So so much fun and I met a lot of really cool people, which obviously I’m keen to do – I can’t deny that it gets a little lonely over here without my people…
Those who are considering investing in large format display advertising should look into LED billboards. This form of signage is currently combining cutting edge technology and skilled marketing to create dynamic, engaging and above all effective advertising.
Then we will no more withdraw from you;
Today Tom spray painted them matte black for me. I then sprayed them with a clear matte sealant and hot glued some rusty stars on the lids. Love how they turned out. The newer willow canisters are behind them.
Hello ShortyBuffs of the world,
Sallmén M, Lindbohm ML, Kyyrönen P, Nykyri E, Anttila A, Taskinen H, Hemminki K. Reduced fertility among women exposed to organic solvents. In: Book of Abstracts of the International Symposium on New Epidemics in Occupational Health; 1994 May 16-19; Helsinki. Helsinki: Finnish Institute of Occupational Health, 1994:76.
Fin somewhere to be private in a public space.
1 small to medium cabbage
"We found that highly extroverted people are happier with their lives because they tend to hold a positive, nostalgic view of the past and are less likely to have negative thoughts and regrets, said the study author Professor Ryan Howell, a psychologist at San Francisco State University.
Update 12-24-11 - Time's Up!!! I'm drawing the winners TODAY -
I have written on and off since I was a child. I used to take episodes of a rambling tale set in Russia to school on a weekly basis and make my friends read them. I also wrote a few ghost stories and then there was that little hand written, hand illustrated magazine called 'Quest' that survived for two issues.
I pray that you find the courage to speak clearly, even if you are trembling.
NOTE: We and God are known by what pleases us
Features :
When I put “racism” into the Encyclopedia electronic search, I got 62 responses. The third one was the entry on Oppression, which gives a clear overview of the concept and the entry cites both Gil and Young (who we mentioned in our earlier comment) which you are welcome to do as ongoing reading. Because oppression is such a critical concept in social work education and practice, and it is also part of understanding a critical perspective that informs your research, I strongly suggest that you do some of this.
A few weeks ago, Kathleen’s physician, Dr. Ferrara, the middle-aged Casanova who had put his hand on the small of Claire’s back unabashedly in front of her mother, told Kathleen that there was nothing more they could do. The cancer was too strong and the treatments that had made her feel hollow and bloodless had ceased to be effective. All there left was to wait. She had been living with Claire for a little under a year and it seemed like the right choice at the time. Claire’s suburb was closer to the hospital; it would be good for her to be around family. Even when she first moved in she knew she didn’t fit into the perfect little life that Claire and her husband Corey had created for themselves. Kathleen felt like a burden, tiptoeing around the hardwood floors of the living room at nights when she couldn’t sleep, inevitably waking Claire who would never complain but would look even more weary than usual the next day at 6 o’clock when she arose to help Nate off to school, and then head to the accounting office where she worked. Claire was there with the handfuls of pills for her mother every morning, always smiling, though they hadn’t had anything to talk about since Claire was about 15 and started caring more for books than for gardening.
Another thing that I ended up doing, was creating a secret handshake with my daughter for those times when we both need to disconnect from a power struggle or when we are having trouble cooperating. It works some of the time, which is better than yelling or fighting at any rate.
Everyone in my program is living with families throughout the working class neighborhood of Batahola Norte. Since the barrio was developed during the revolution, all of our host parents have many stories to share about surviving the food shortages and chaos of the 1980s. All of our families also have connections to the cultural center here that does incredible work throughout the community. Free classes in cooking, art, computation, English, music, and many other things are offered at the center for free. The center has been so welcoming to all of us and a few friends and I now lead English conversation groups there twice a week. Two of our host siblings also participate in the choir at the center and over Spring Break we were able to listen to them perform alongside the national orchestra – by far the best choir I have ever seen perform live.
Continue in prayer,and watch in the same with thanksgiving.
Cover the tray with aluminum foil and pop it in a preheated oven. Bake at 450F (225C) for 45 minutes.
I love figuring out new recipes and new ways to use things, so I was quite happy to comply. We eat a lot of turkey in this house and we love Peppadew peppers. A pizza just isn't a pizza for me unless I have chopped peppadew's on it, and as a woman who is always trying to keep my weight down, turkey is a natural and healthy choice.
dozens of times while I drift in and out of sleep.
However the only sort of “dualism” that I am willing to consider seriously is the dualism of form and matter to which I appealed in the discussion of rationality (and I take that to be a major concession). The question of the form-matter distinction is an interesting question for general metaphysics (and physics), and it is at the level of general metaphysics that it will have to be resolved one way or another: it is not ultimately, I argue, a problem particular to the metaphysics of mind. So the hope for a natural semantic of psychological predicates is still alive, granting that human beings may be possessed, like everything else in nature, of formal properties that are different from physical properties. Other than that (admittedly major) caveat, it is my view that there are only physical properties. So I will now have to argue that there are no phenomenal properties. A successful argument will have to persuade the reader that the absent-qualia problem has been satisfactorily addressed.
Additionally, PS Vita is equipped with a 5″ OLED touchscreen, dual analog sticks, precise rear multi-touch screen, two cameras and a built-in microphone that can be used with any Skype-certified headset.
I realise Mildred X will remain unconvinced, but I'll post a couple more videos now, showing the young Nina, before her metamorphosis. I think it's clear, even in the early days, that this girl was not going to be a compliant little drone, her personality is too strong for her to stay in step with the crowd.
JACKSON, Miss. — It wasn’t a secret that Dr. Ralph Arnold Smith Jr. was still angry at the attorney who represented his ex-wife during their divorce in the mid-1990s. Now authorities in the small Mississippi Delta town of Greenwood are investigating whether the well-known oncologist was so filled with rage that he hired men to kill the lawyer.
thanks to the excellent often read and reread book The Comic art of Reg Parlett 60 years of comics by Alan Clark I can bring you this gem..
After attending my very first hockey game in October, I am definitely a huge Nashville Predators fan! Now that I've been to a few of their games, I am kind of/sort of understanding more about hockey. For example, I now know that a power play is more than an alliteration!
And despite memorizing the license plate before they drove off…I followed the “Negro Code” that is, NO SNITCHIN’!!
07 Five Years
Not every unmarried mother was coerced or forced into giving up her child, but the women going public today are not alone.
I'm sharing this following article for a few reasons, the first of which is that I'm a big fan of Chuck Klosterman. I've read 3 of his books and actually saw him speaking at a college a few years ago. Here he's attended a double-header of concerts in NYC seeing Creed in one venue and Nickelback in the other. Here's the link:
having the worst case scenario happen and you
Despite issues with waiting times and mediocre survival rates on some chronic diseases, Canada ranks high in such aggregate indicators as healthy life expectancy, potential years of life loss, and survival rates from stroke. The 2005 court decision notwithstanding, Canada's commitment to equality of access remains the signature statement of its health care system. And it has provided an object lesson that Vermont may be taking to heart: Single-payer need not start at the national level. As T. R. Reid observes,
For those that don't know.. Emmy was dared by some little boy's to jump off a wall... She did!! The boys chickenned out!! Go figure..
Well, another hockey regular-season has come to an end, and I think I have watched more hockey this year than any other year in my entire life, and a large portion of that is due to the help of the NHL Network :) The NHL Playoffs get underway tonight, with Sidney Crosby and Kris Letang in the lineup for the Pittsburgh Penguins (let’s go PENS!) as they face off against rival Philadelphia Flyers … what more could a hockey fan ask for? Well, to photograph it – of course.
This includes SA Defence Force actions, for instance the 600 deaths at Kassinga in Angola during the war in 1978.
On occasion, my family likes to quote Barbara Robinson’s infamous Herdman family from her novel The Best Christmas Pageant Ever. Now, with illustrations by Laura Cornell, Robinson has adapted her classic story for a younger audience. I love the unexpected qualities of this story. Just try not to laugh out loud when little Gladys Herdman interprets the Angel of the Lord as a comic book character who shrieks, “Shazam!” But when Imogene, the rudest, bossiest, nastiest Herdman finally appears in the pageant as Mary, quiet and reverent and tearful, I defy any reader not to get emotional along with the awed church audience. Robinson’s story is edited here, but it keeps the requisite humor parents expect from the original. Cornell, who illustrated Is There Really a Human Race? and It’s Hard to Be Five, is the perfect artist to pair with this story. Her pictures are raucous, chaotic, and full of mischief–just like those terrible, wonderful Herdmans!
Personal recommendations can change that. I try and do it all the time but it occurs to me that if all the book loving public had a go at BOOK BOUNCE it might increase the general readership.
And so we arrived to the dock the next day and boarded ship for what was one of the most memorable explorations of the natural world I have ever known. We were given our snorkeling and safety equipment, provided a lesson, arrived at our destination, and moored near the reef for several hours. We jumped into the clean, clear aquamarine ocean - a virtual aquarium brimming with sealife of every description.
To prepare glaze, combine powdered sugar and remaining ingredients, stirring until well blended, drizzle over cooled cake.
Sometimes, the days turn into weeks, turn into months and I forget when the last time was that I had a break. Not a vacation. Not a date with my husband. Just a break. For me.
I have in my heart, the bus rides we took to go grocery shopping, because you did not have a car for yourself.
The truth is, if there were apostle pundits in Jesus’ day, many of them would have been scratching their heads even before Maundy Thursday. Tack on another 48 hours, and the hawks would really have been sharpening their talons.
We’re both very fortunate in having husbands and partners who earn a decent wage and, while our labor is necessary to the family income, it is not the primary or exclusive one.
I hope I still have some readers left.
Then Marc (who had been trying to get my attention while I was buying Morgan) took me over to some other caged birds.
The essentially residential neighborhoods that surround the park are also historic, with many fine houses in interesting architectural styles. The whole area has been designated as the Washington Park Historic District.
we eat with the appetite of birds, or babies,
This site includes resources that allow a user to understand the symptoms and mood episodes associated with depression. Forums and Question/Answer areas are provided for those seeking personal or general information.
The birds jocoser sung;
Once you're there, you can now make changes by either selecting a custom colour, or by adding in a background image.
- The IGP is a pure, unadulterated, garden variety moron. He said rather sulkily yesterday on TV of the protesters, ”Dia bukan jerit Bersih. Dia jerit Refomasi.” His bosses probably didn’t tell him that the whole Bersih rally was about Electoral REFORM.
Sad to say that Ferrer does little as the main villain - how much can you do when lying in an iron lung? He's a great actor, but being funny in a huge metal tube is hard to do; safe to say that he almost gets away with it.
Google Reader and RSS Feeds are somewhat obsolete. This has come over the past few years, but there are still people out there who are using RSS Feeds. Google Reader lets you basically design your own online magazine that you can manage and read most recent updates. It is quite easy to use, I played with it a fair bit and it was easy enough to add someones blog to the reader list. I can see the benefit for people who manage multiple blogs they follow. Google Reader also allows searching and reading bundles. You will find nothing new on Google Reader that you cannot find on Google Search. There are some RSS feed/reader programs out there, I have never had an enjoyable experience with them, but I understand some are popular.
who died suddenly in the third year
Kamla Rani’s government booked prime time on all local television….a virtual media blitz….to trot out David Abdullah, Makandal Daaga, Ashworth Jack, Prakash Ramadhar and the Rani herself to remind us that we must be afraid of the PNM….doh put the PNM back there…We do real thing for all yuh….look old ppl could travel on bus and ferry for free…look we increase NIS…look…look…look….and you start to realise that the reason Kamla Rani’s speeches sound so desperate and out of touch is that she is desperately out of touch.
* Secretary
Funded by a Swiss non-profit, Medicines for Malaria Venture (MMV), arterolane (codenamed OZ277) was revealed in 2004 in a paper published in Nature. It was developed as part of a collaborative drug discovery project that consisted of researchers in the US, the UK, Switzerland and Australia. The aim of the project was to discover a new chemical entity (NCE) that could overcome the limitations of artemisinin, a widely-used antimalarial drug.
I wondered if the children knew there was a link between the famous author and Sunderland. They didn’t. The link was something I chanced upon while doing more on-line research into the family tree. I read that Lewis Carroll was a frequent visitor to Holy Trinity Church which isn't just in Sunderland it's in Southwick just a few minutes walk from where my dad's family lived – Carrolls, all of them!
After the first suspicious death, the captain and his crew are grimly determined to carry on as usual. Frustrated and dismayed by their inaction, Sidney decides to take matters into her own hands and launch her own investigation. She enlists the halfhearted help of her friend and business partner, the flamboyant and fun-loving Jay Wilson.
No, Mary–imagination doesn’t count.
Metro: Cleveland Park or Woodley Park Metro (Red Line). The insider tip is to get off at Cleveland Park so you have a downhill walk to the zoo entrance. Then, when you are done, you can walk downhill to Woodley Park to get back on!
“Here’s a bunch of numbers you’ve never heard of. I’m not going to tell you what they are or explain why they mean I disagree with you, I’m just going to throw a wall of statistics at you and make you feel like you’re really stupid.”
I find that the most effective way to discover a business owner’s concerns and to open a dialogue with that owner is to ask questions. In this article, I have identified five questions every agent can ask a business owner to determine insurance opportunities. I also share a hypothetical example, which can be used with a business owner to illustrate the risk of doing nothing.
CSAs require a large up-front cash layout and lock you into eating whatever happens to be delivered. Farmers’ markets vary vastly in size and quality, from those that enforce requirements on farm-size and distance to those that don’t seem to hold vendors to any standards at all. It’s dismaying to discover resellers at “farmers’” markets; for all you know, they bought their wares at Safeway that morning.
14th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
“Yes, of course, Gordon. After all, you are at least 90 years old. Perhaps you have a sister or daughter who would be able to join you?”
Witnesses told police they heard Davis say he would hit the first person he saw in order to impress girls he was with, the affidavit from Lynchburg Det. Todd Rodes states.
"Pop, get the tomatoes!" she exclaimed.
OK…what is Zen Studios Pinball?
from the planet Zeetron,
AS: Your series Thresholds was included in the seminal book New Color/New Work, by Sally Eauclaire, published in 1984, which places you among the masters of early color photography, including Stephen Shore, Joel Sternfeld, Mitch Epstein and William Eggleston. As one of the few photographers celebrated for color photography during this time did you have the sense that your work was challenging the conventions of art photography? Was there camaraderie among your contemporaries that spoke of this movement and pushed the work towards greater acceptance?
Whisk flour, sugar, and salt in medium bowl to blend. Add butter and rub in with fingertips until mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Add 2 tablespoons ice water; stir until dough clumps together, adding more ice water by teaspoonfuls if dough is dry. Gather dough into ball; flatten into disk. Wrap in plastic and chill at least 2 hours. Keep chilled. Let dough soften 10 minutes at room temperature before rolling out.
I'm back, it's been a while! I finally managed to hand in my project and the feeling of relief and freedom is hitting me right about now... I should probably be kicking back with a puzzle or something as mind-numbing to tone down the stress levels, but instead I just landed in Turkey! I was planning somewhat of a holiday to company my boyfriend who is playing a golf tournament, but I managed to book a lookbook shoot and a big feature post for the week of my stay, to not give myself too much free time. But so many posts to catch up on to apologize for my absence one outfit at the time...
Now, I’ve noticed the trend for science fiction stories to end on an upnote before. The one most consistent thing I’ve gleaned from reading the Writers of the Future anthology is that the vast, vast majority of scifi stories end in victory of some kind – occasionally bittersweet, but consistently upbeat in some fashion. This note on my rejection letter left me wondering ‘is this a thing?’
This was our first time at the Ice Wine Festival. Held in quaint Niagara-on-the-Lake, a charming 18th century village, local wineries and culinary institutes meet to host a wine and gourmet food tasting along the main street. It was C.O.L.D., but that didn't stop the masses from coming out and enjoying their favourite vino. Gabriel remarked that it felt like we were in Europe, where often, despite the nasty weather, people still venture out to the markets or the town squares. Some highlights of the afternoon included seeing the "World's Largest Wine Glass", and marveling at the amazing ice sculptures and ice bars that were created around the venue. This is definitely on my 'to-do' list for next winter!
The book isn't scary, though it is creepy. My favorite chapters were also my least (if that makes any sense at all)--when Jake (George) spends a few months in the small town of Derry, Maine. King paints the portrait of a dark town full of secrets and tragedy, and it haunted me well after the section was over. Still, creepy* as it was, it was also my favorite part because it felt so real. That's where I personally saw King's brilliance on full display.
But let me back up…
She is great friends with Blackie, the farm cat and it is only a matter of time before he joins her on the bench!
In between my physical labour, emotional doldrum, entertaining a few friends, essential jewelry crafting and compulsive crocheting, I make Earl Grey tea, with a splodge of milk...
And speaking of hoping...have you heard about the fun MilSpouse Appreciation Day Blog Hop being sponsored, starting this Friday, by the lovely ladies at Riding the Roller Coaster and Household 6 Diva? This Friday is MilSpouse Appreciation Day and the hop starts at noon! It is going to be a great way to discover and read new MilSpouse blogs and hopefully meet some new friends! For the rules of the hop and how to get linked up, stop by Riding the Roller Coaster or clicking on the link below.
Let me give you the whole story…
i am a relatively healthy person
Yes. Well said. No need for me to embellish that.
A new music business plan client made a joke other day about online marketing and saying that I was practicing most of what I was preaching to him but not plugging my book or services lately. So, I am going to get back to the monthly plug as a music consultant, my book, my speaking and my services for this blog. Thanks Jay!!!
The article looks at how the challenges faced by all due to the recession have resulted in a new wave of Irish design & at the role the design industry has to play in promoting a brave new Ireland at home and abroad . (Image above show designs by Ursula Celano www.ursulacelano.com).
My other goals here at OMF have always been about motivating and inspiring women to organize. This blog is a resource for you, as well. You can always go down to my Search Bar on the lower right side of my side bar, on the blog, and type in a search word of something you are wanting to organize. You know, like “closets” “kitchen” or “kids” and lots of great place to start and I have lots of content there. Well, I hope that this year you will be even more inspired and there is so much I have planned for you to help achieve that.
Royal Thunder’s CVI will be streaming in its entirely via AOL Spinner beginning May 21 for one week.
The Earth’s climate has become warmer over the past century, a trend that the vast majority of climate scientists attribute to human activity. Warming is expected to continue – a recent study projected the average global temperature will rise between 2.5 and 5.4°F by 2050. Scientists expect global warming to result in an increased occurrence of wildfires, droughts, floods, and species-level extinctions. But what might climate change mean for the well-being of farmworkers in the United States?
totally different way of looking at it!"
‘Or we could fit your body with animatronics and have someone remote control you to rise from the grave screaming ‘Rrrrrrraaaaaahhhhhhh.’
Anonymous used to mean something, you know? Fire. The wheel. Beowulf and The Book of Job and some of the best pornography mankind ever produced. That was us. We've been writing and inventing our asses off for thousands of years to make the world a better place... and now you people come along and suddenly we're screwing around with YouTube videos? We've gone from creating written language to rickrolling the Church of Scientology? Is this how you keep the legacy alive?
Oh and if you are interested in making your own just let me know so I can make a proper tutorial and upload the templates. I definitely recommend it, it was crazy easy.
- Booster Draft
Sauber introduced a number of developments Late in the Jerez test.
All of that would be fine though if it hadn’t have been for how the situation has unfolded between BFF (who will now be referred to as exBFF – I’m sure you can work that all out) and I.
Collective gasps of surprise could be heard as Nibras stepped up and joined the two men on the stage. Mr. Think laid his arm gently and reassuringly on his shoulder as he proceeded to tell his story from the beginning. When he got to the part about Sharshar blackmailing him, the psychic couldn't control his rage, he lunged forward, shouting:
"We then went on to a panel on Shaking Up the Brewing Scene with Martin Dickie from Brewdog. Martin had everyone absolutely quiet and on the edge of their seats as he started playing grunge rock on his laptop, methodically pulled out and poured a bottle of Brewdog ale, and took a sip before saying a word to the audience. His talk was mostly a history of Brewdog but did not disappoint with several irreverent lines and a bit of a “this is what we do, like it or $%#* yourself” attitude."
Well My last child graduated May 27. It sure was a sad thing but a good thing too. Sad because he is the last one of four. But I am proud of him. It sure was a hard road for him. Have no pictures at the time yet but I will soon.
5% can effectively multitask
Kalakalappu
" Ahem, I don't get shit faced until AFTER I put her down!"
Here’s the new file:
Any registration that issues or is maintained due to a misstatement is forever marred and vulnerable to challenge by third party. A successful challenge based on fraud results in the cancellation of the entire registration.
“On the eighth day, when it was time to circumcise him, he was named Jesus, the name the angel had given him before he had been conceived.”
The theeeerrrrump theeeerrrump of the wheels on a suitcase hitting the ridges of the floor tiles
I see Your lusty presence adorning fine country homes
I’ve always been a dreamer. I’ve always been a Jill-Of-All-Trades.
I'd tried a couple of the Weyermann pilot brewery beers at a festival in the past, so was glad to get the opportunity to try a couple more, especially considering their rather limited scale.
There is a little finishing canter before coming to a standstill.
But even with prayer guides and Scripture to guide you, I know how hard it can be to trust the God who is allowing your child to suffer. So I won’t condemn you for asking prickly questions. Instead, I’ll encourage you, cry with you, and support you when your faith grows weak. When you can’t hang on a minute longer, I’ll hold you close until your strength and your faith return.
Faith isn't about the Science, but there are some intriguing ideas here in that regard. It is a smart, thoughtful exploration of humanity and how far obsessions can take us. So the back story. A few centuries ago a mysterious ship nicknamed "Faith" attacked the space faring Sakhran Empire (vaguely lizard-like humanoids) causing their society to pull back technologically. No one knows what Faith is exactly. Is it even like a normal ship with a crew or some kind of space-born creature? That mystery alone pulled me in and gave off a very strong Star Trek vibe. Faith is what you might get if Joe Abercrombie turned his dark skills to Science Fiction after reading a few Robert J. Sawyer novels and seeing a few too many Q episodes of Star Trek. This isn't a hard Sci-Fi read by any stretch, but that should help pull in the more fringe readers who fear something too technical and just want a totally enthralling story.
Final flavors of beer are influenced by the strain of yeast and fermentation temperature. Lager yeast is best used at temperatures from 55°F down to 32°F. Classic lagering of beers takes place over a period of time from weeks to many months at a temperature of 45°F. Lager yeasts are bottom fermenting, which is to say that they ferment the wort while sitting on the bottom of the fermenter.
I started writing when I was five years old, and I didn't get published until I was forty. So it took me a while. And, as such, I've been an aspiring author for a lot longer than I've been a published author, so I know exactly what it's like.
Lately I have so come to respect spiritualities that aren't bound to specific religions. It's very freeing. But still, the moment -- the precise millisecond -- I hear the word "Jesus," something old and bitter is triggered inside me. Which is a shame, isn't it? I joke to Ross sometimes that just hearing "Jesus" pronounced the Spanish way ("hay-sus") is better. Because until I can fully separate the frustrating examples I saw way back when of "Christianity" from the relatively enlightened views of Jesus, which are a lot like Buddha's, which are a lot like modern Indian gurus', I'll still feel the knee-jerk meanness each time someone utters that name.
“I have the party’s report card ready,” he said of the various people-oriented programmes implemented by the party since he took over the helm about two years ago.
I write and speak in hopes
While wolves would remain fully protected within Yellowstone and Grand Teton national parks, elsewhere in Wyoming they would be subject to shooting, trapping and snaring, including 83 percent of the state where they will be considered “predators” and there will be no limits on their killing. The remaining portion of the state would be considered a “trophy game management area,” where killing wolves would be permitted, with the goal of reducing the population from approximately 29 packs to around 10.
About the same time Dr. Bender was conducting her electroshock experiments, she was also widely experimenting on autistic and schizophrenic children with what she termed other “treatment endeavors.” These included use of a wide array of psycho-pharmaceutical agents, several provided to her by the Sandoz Chemical Co. in Basel, Switzerland, as well as Metrazol, sub-shock insulin therapy, amphetamines and anticonvulsants. Metrazol was a trade name for pentylenetetrazol, a drug used as a circulatory and respiratory stimulant. High doses cause convulsions, as discovered in 1934 by the Hungarian-American neurologist and psychiatrist Ladislas J. Meduna.
Alfred Toepfer was born near Luneburg Heath, a plain full of meadows, forests, peat bogs, and sand dunes in northern Germany, just southeast of Hamburg. Historically, the Luneberg Heath was a place of nationalistic pride where rugged old style farming practices harmonized with the natural surroundings. Throughout the first half of the 20th century, the Luneburg Heath was symbolic of a strong German character patriotically rooted in the soil of the homeland. Indeed, after Heinrich Himmler committed suicide, he was buried in the Luneburg Heath in an unmarked grave.
Jacques Cousteau was standing there next to me, his elbows resting on the rail.
Thrash Metal will not be part of Jester King's regular lineup but an occasional release, "when the mood happens to strike us."
d. ISAs
Then came the fiercest of all storms. The wind blew so violently this way and that. Trees all around were dashed to the ground, broken, uprooted, a jangled mess.
When you lift weights, your muscles adapt by becoming larger and stronger. Your bones adapt by becoming more dense. Etc…
It’s not on the peaks (good times-success)
Happy Holidays, all! Sorry I am quite on the blog front. I have a friend in town this month and am laying low hanging out with her.
¼ cup plain soy creamer
Erase – Undo and redo are available along with an eraser and clear page feature.
P/S BTW, my feeling is that these tests reflect on the teachers as much, if not more, than the students. I tell my kids not to worry about their scores.
Terraforming: Contemporary Discourse in Landscape Photography
Its been over two months since being made redundant now and times are really hard. To spend day after day applying for jobs, not hearing anything back from anyone is extremely demoralising and depressing. Yes, its that dreaded word again, depression.
Since I’m in the song writing mood I’ve been listening to myself. What I mean by that is when I’m talking to someone I actually think about what I’m saying in case it might make some good lyrics. The other day I was talking to my friend and then in mid-conversation I said “Hey! That’d make awesome lyrics!” and starting writing it down on my phone. My friend thought I was a little weird.
Bird, “I only went to a male therapist once, and I didn’t like it at all. Even though I resist therapy in general, the few time I knew I needed help, I went to women. I wouldn’t want to discuss something this personal with a guy…my own little two cents. You are very in-tune with what you need…you will make the right decision for yourself!”
So my Dad and I just finished jogging and I was just there at our sala, sitting and staring at our toy poodle as she walks around aimlessly, and in my staring state I started noticing her legs and how she looks like she’s wearing invisible high heels and I wondered if that’s how people came up with the idea of putting heels on shoes – because it looks lovely in an animalistic way, I guess – and wondered further how it came to be that only women wear them and so I ended up consuming ten minutes of my time looking up the history of high heels. No better way to start the day than by doing some random researching!
disastrous consequences.
Coo-kie (also said very carefully in two syllables)
In order to produce the WPS program, WPL lawfully acquired copies of the Learning Edition of the SAS System, which were supplied under licences limiting the rights of the licensee to non-production purposes. WPL used and studied those programs in order to understand their functioning but there is nothing to suggest that WPL had access to or copied the source code of the SAS components.
Lastly, I write this for me. Walt Whitman sang the song of himself and so do I. What in the name of the American Dream is wrong with that?
So many great ideas running through my head. So much work to be done!
She did not not move her eyes from her Prime.
“Big ISSUE! See? Not, Big SHOE, Big ISSUE. Now, say it again properly.”
Suddenly we’ve been plucked from the front-lines, our lives in the balance, and now we find ourselves caught up in a victory we could never have won. Now we’re shouting with joy and advancing on the Philistines to plunder them.
I want to make sure we don't ever get too busy that we can't be thankful for the days we have.
whose origins are from of old,
some to illnesses and some completely unexpectedly.
My top-earning title clocked up two and a half times as many loans in the UK as sales worldwide. It's called Too Dirty and is published by Hachette. All the top-selling fiction titles were for children aged 5-6. Even though the PLR is split 50:50 with the illustrator on these titles, the books generate a third of their advance each year in PLR.
Who knew that electronics would be my biggest challenge this year?
Not in lone splendour hung aloft the night
Egyptian Businessman Yasser Salem Followed Al-Qaradhawi Fatwa, Sponsored Algerians to Go Fight Coalition Forces in Iraq
BLITZER: All right. Let’s start with a question from the audience.
Last year’s budget included a 0.5 per cent increase for capital projects, while 2009 contributed no hike to infrastructure.
The conference features 62 talks as well as 40 poster presentations by PhD students, discussing the recent advances to the most central questions which life sciences research faces today. The Introductory Talk will be given by Professor Nigel Scrutton on ‘Crossing knowledge boundaries: a perspective on team-based interdisciplinary bioscience’ and Professor Dame Nancy Rothwell will give the Keynote Speech on ‘A career in life sciences research – do’s and don’ts!’
This summer I was placed in a unique position. I traveled the country (and a few others) with people I had met only weeks before. While I could go on forever in all the ways that this experience pushed me and caused me to grow, there was one thing in particular that this group provided: new eyes to watch my spiritual life. My brothers and sisters were ready to challenge me because they saw me for who I could be in Christ. They knew the freedom that I could walk in. They were not afraid to be brutally honest in calling me out in my sin, painful as it was.
the price of my mistake,
ik wil jouw lichaam voelen trillen
Oh, what fun! I look forward to seeing what you think =)
I did not realize she had a Masters in Clinical Psychology - that is really interesting.
Links℠ reward points are simply points earned when you buy the things you buy every day, whether for business or personal use. Right now you can earn these points when you buy online from hundreds of merchant partners in the AchieveLinks program, like Home Depot, Cabellas, Avis, Fashion Bug, Walmart, Hotels.com and others.
Sorry, not enough time to post ingredients. Have to go get cupcakes I ordered from the grocery store! Send an email if you would really like to know what cartridges I used on the Cricut. Thank you for looking at my post. Kim
M: Minnesota~I truly love MN. I was born and raised there~a chunk of my heart will always be there. My husband and I also lived there for 3 years. I loved the weather, the terrain, the people,…I have loved everywhere I have lived, of course. But MN will always be special.
Why this works for me: this concept is a bit more abstract, and it means something different for everyone. For me, I do get sick a lot. It’s something I have to acknowledge, and then accept that it means I have to work that much harder after I’m feeling better. I might have to work 5-6 hours one night, and then 4 the next. That doesn’t mean I should let myself get away with doing only the bare bones the third night. For me, this is the hardest thing to implement, and it is normally the source of my procrastination. Hopefully you can learn from my mistakes.
booth.
Today's card is FIVE challenges combined!!! I'm running out of time to complete all the Dare to Get Dirty challenges, so I've combined Betty's, Laurie's, Jami's, Carolina's and Deb's!!!! The title of the post is taken from Jami's Blue challenge.
That made us feel so small?
I used to see the moon and the stars
12- Dark Matter
Wang Chung Dance hall days UK
That didn’t surprise me in the least. I’ve always been the Hermione Granger of any group I was in.
So you go in and climb a flight of stairs and arrive at another full size Marine (two in one day! Overload!!) then some display cabinets. The army in there at the minute is really impressive; every model almost is converted. Unfortunately I lack pictures of this but it was a real inspiration.
½ bunch green asparagus; trimmed and cut diagonally into ½-inch slices
Somewhere in its depths, was a maze. I don't recall what it was called, but deep in the maze you could find your heart's desire -- but you could only go in ONCE.
The biggest difference is in weight. Pet-1 is much heavier than the remodeled Pet. It feels, and looks, more serious than later Pets. Viewed from the front, the levers are slightly skewed. The shutter mechanism is a little bit different and can't be swapped with the later model. The fake leather is much smoother and actually feels like leather. The Pet-2 feels distinctly plastic. The badge is more silver compared to that on Pet-2 (non-gold models), which have a slight bronze color. Overall, a heftier build. Pet-1 is most common in black with silver trim. It is also less common than Pet-2, but there doesn't seem to be any difference in value between the two.
There are plenty of sites that can help the online poker players to know about rakeback deals .And in addition to this one can even know about sites which offer free poker prizes, and free poker cash besides rake back and VIP poker deals.
We get to start off the New Year with a visit from my best friend since birth, who's current residence is in Conventary in the UK. Also her mother who lives in Texas, USA.
Kingstone
Projected score: 169-127
9. Take A Look
I have never ever liked regulations really. So I’ve to come clean and admit it. I was completely wrong, and Google was appropriate almost all along. I attempted to beat them at Search engine marketing, I attempted to obtain to the top of the search rankings using each and every form of link developing tactic I could get my hands on. But I was wrong and I’ve learned my Lesson.
There was a time in my life when I never wanted to share my "testimony" because of all that I have done wrong and all the wrong that has been done to me. I think that it is one area where God has really been changing me. To go from a fear of what others may think to a fear (healthy fear) of what my Lord may think. 1990 was a census year, I was 17(soon to be 18)years old and had my first baby on this day (3/23). I have been trying to look back and see God in my life during that time. It is hard but I know that He was there.
Then there was name and race selection and getting everybody to choose New Halas as their starting town.
Dictator: Dictator has seen a purple dog.
Now that Spring break is over and all is quiet around here I thought I would share a few of the details of our kitchen makeover. I have to be up front with you........ this "makeover" was a LONG process for us as we just weren't sure what we wanted to do. And because I have agonized over whether or not I ought to paint oak cabinets.... you know because of how it might affect resale value. But well, this is OUR HOME.... and WE are living here so we NEEd to do what is best for us (or in this case best for me.... trust me, I'm the only one who spends much time in the kitchen and I LOVE spending time in there now!)
Have you found yourself saying “D’oh?” Is your dad a big wheel down at the cracker factory? Have you ever wondered what Duff Beer tastes like? Does your favorite family consist of five dysfunctional yellow people? If you answered yes to any of these, go ahead and click play below!
I have over 500 pictures to choose from (Im slowly trying to at least get them up on Facebook), tons of schoolhouse info and other news. Hopefully in the next day or two I'll get some quality time with my computer!
URAN 2 —
For there is not one agent on the planet that likes every single book on the NYT bestseller list. For every book on that list there are agents who passed on it and editors who passed on it and it's just part of the business. There's even a "fun" game we agents and editors like to play called "Well, I passed on X." The bigger and more successful X is, the more you up the ante. It's not a game you really like to win of course, but it sure makes you feel better to play.
Asides from talking about the weekend ahead of me, I don’t have much to write about. I guess. I’m just not feeling too good or positive mentally. I have this big barrier up ahead of me stopping me from moving forward, the barrier in which I think that I don’t want to live. So everything seems pointless and stupid. I don’t have much of a will to live. Albeit, on the other hand, I don’t have any plans to do anything to end my life. I feel like I am hovering somewhere in between and it’s a really uncomfortable place to be in.
6And in those days shall men seek death, and shall not find it; and shall desire to die, and death shall flee from them.
This has implications for how companies staff their training departments. It is also an important factor as companies continuously recruit for new talent to distribute their products. The adage “you only get one chance to make a good impression” comes to mind here. Companies appointing affiliated agents to do business with them are able to make a favorable impression and get these producers off to a good start with a high quality product and sales training program. Coaching and mentorship programs, while offered much less frequently, can have a significant impact on the long-term success of producers.
2 start
you cannot hold me down
Britten has stumbled upon the latest victim of the Gemini Killer, a serial killer who drains his victims of their blood, then carves a Roman numeral II in their chest, and always kills two paired victims. For the last twelve years, the Gemini killer has killed two victims every year in a different city. The dead man Britten found is his first in Los Angeles. The problem: the Gemini Killer is dead. So either the Gemini Killer has risen from the dead, or there's a copycat Gemini Killer out there. Either way, within 48 hours another victim will be killed in another park.
An interesting case of bi-culturalism, Yas was born in San Francisco in 1921 but raised in Kochi City, Japan. Concerned that he would be drafted in to the Japanese army, he moved back to the States in 1939 to study agriculture. Nine years later, after becoming infatuated with the medium of photography, he enrolled in Chicago's famous Institute of Design where he studied with Harry Callahan. His American work from this period to his permanent return to Tokyo in 1961 is one of the highlights of what is known as the Chicago School. (Hmmm... note to self - interesting idea for a show!)
If E-40 made the most robust-sounding albums of 2011 that I had to turn down my iPod to listen to, Dawn Richard made the best one that was so poorly mastered (if it was mastered at all) that I had to turn my iPod up to listen to it. Of course, lots of rappers make low budget mixtapes that come up short in the production or post-production, but that often fits their grimy aesthetic. Dawn Richard, an R&B singer who was one of the driving forces behind one of the best and biggest-sounding major label albums of the past couple years, Diddy-Dirty Money's Last Train To Paris, deserves better. Ostensibly, that should happen whenever she gets to release the album A Tell Tale Heart that this 'mixtape' exists to promote, but really this feels pretty substantial in and of itself.
2. Debora
- and most were between 50-70% off!
I love this neighborhood. I love it for its proximity to downtown, for the diversity of its residents, the bright colors of its houses, and the deliciousness of its taco bus. It's the C.D., baby -- The Central District -- all cozy and weird and occasionally urine-scented snuggled up next to downtown Seattle.
What has happened though, and it feels like a recent change, is an appreciation that I'm closer to the end than the beginning. This is not meant to sound maudlin, which is why I described the feeling as an appreciation.
Not unlike childbirth, the ice bath is one of those uncomfortable experiences that you remember as painful, but cannot quite conjure the extremity of it until you do it again. Yesterday afternoon I filled my tub with cold water, filled a large pitcher with ice, made a cup of hot peppermint tea and grabbed an oversized hoodie. At this point I ask that you do your best not to picture me naked, but if you must, please note that when nude I look surprisingly like Angelina Jolie sans tattoos. I stayed clothed from the waist up in a tank top and that warm hoodie. I set my tea on the edge of the tub, knowing it would warm me from the inside out. I stuck one foot in the tub and then stood there--it was a painful shocking sensation- as if I stepped barefoot into a snowbank. I pulled my other foot off of the floor and went to submerge it but I just couldn't. I just stood there balanced on one foot like a flamingo. Every time I went to put my foot into the water it was if it had a mind of its own--there was no way it was going in. I probably could have stood in that position for hours, but let's face it, I had just run 13 miles (14 if you include the mile we ran just to get to the start line) and there was no way I could balance like that forever. Finally I gave in and stood with both feet in the cold, cold water. I thought about frostbite, and stupidity and the fact that I was an idiot for trying. I stood there for about five minutes when I finally became brave enough to sit....
Just look at that fucking thing. It’s hideous. Sure, it’s a new car and all, but it’s got this lovely old school look and feel about it. And… and… ahh, fuck it, it’s not gonna win anything anyway, so I’m not gonna waste anymore time on it.
Now, let's say your mom wants to be lavished with a week-long celebration (and you better believe she deserves it). Well, you're in luck, as May 14th-20th is Craft Beer Week! Each night during the week, Beer Kitchen will be offering a mini 3-course beer dinner, for $38. There are also daily specials at McCoy's and The Foundry, including the tapping of our spring annual beer, a Maibock, on Tuesday, May 15th. Eight bucks will get you a commemorative 20 oz beer mug, full of beer! Keep checking here for more updates on events happening throughout the week.
Easter Breakfast from 7:30 – 9:00 am, Sunday, April 8th hosted by the Youth Group with proceeds going to the youth group fund.
The Armory Center for the Arts invites you to register for the Summer 2012 GYST workshop
The FBI is worried enough to assign an agent to assist and protect Gina after Mr. WNM contacts her. He makes it perfectly clear that he can get to her anytime he wants. He draws Gina into a game of chance. A very slim chance at solving the hidden messages in the rhyming poems he sends to her home. It's the only way to discover his identity and her fate.
~1 Tsp salt
Here's my Babymed.com HCG chart for the average Singleton values:
Quote: “Yeah, right Lisa. A wonderful, magical animal.”
The girls had their shots the day before and both of them were cranky as all get out. Yes, I’m one of those moms who vaccinates their children. I also sometimes feed my older daughter fast food for dinner. And, occasionally, I forget to put diaper cream on them. Well, now that I’ve aired my dirty laundry on the world wide web, let’s get on with the story…
1: Cathedral sanctifier(W), Nephalia smauggler(U), Wingcrafter(U)
Oh, yeah, and did I mention, this photo was taken while I was running a marathon. A frickin’ marathon and people thought I should be worried about how I looked. This was one of the proudest moments of my life and, forgive my language, but I’ll be damned if I let anyone take away one second of the pride and joy I feel about completing that marathon because I don’t fit into their perfect package of what a woman’s body should be.
Apart from her being very cute and pretty, this is what caught my attention:
And here is the scary part: If the climate was not warming, the ratio would be very near 1:1.
I leave you with a few of my own opinions, coming from a girl who's been along side O' Chicken Man- Prince of Poultry going on 6 years. Chick-fil-A is king, WOGs are the bomb (pronounced wawgs among most chicken people), and large sized wings are totally under-rated.
Bullying is the new big thing (Just did a google news search and there are 8,840 stories in the past hour). It’s now why kids kill themselves. It’s why people quit jobs. It’s why people go home unhappy. It’s why they then take their work life out on their families.
But it's dark, filthy, disaster diner.
After the subject of ritters had been thoroughly exhausted we moved on to next week's Lichterfest, the children make lanterns from highly flammable paper & glue, put a lighted candle inside (most of the classes use small battery powered lights but Herr B poo poos such modern thinking) the classes then march through the woods behind the school together while the parents stay at the school and drink glühwein (I knew there was a reason for going) then the children come back, we stand around a bonfire in the playground while the children sing songs before everyone goes off to their respective classrooms for a small performance and food.
Lots going on in our part of the blogosphere...
Happiness fills my heart.
“You’re hungry I bet.” Darien laughed, looking down on the sleepy princess in his arms. “Come on, let’s take you to the master and he’ll fix you right up.”
After I’d managed to get this, which actually went surprisingly well, I started on the knitting. Now…to be honest again I could cope. But my first blanket square did have a couple of holes in it. Grrr. On occasions I could see that I was almost missing a stitch or going for the wrong one.
I loved everything about Thailand: the white sand, the turquoise waters, the fantastic food and the wonderful people. I can now understand why people seem to go back there over and over again, with so many different places to see and so many islands to choose from — where do you even begin?
spending time with my mom and sister yesterday
“We all just went there thinking it was going to be a cool, chilled day and right at the end it got crazy,” said Salsbery, 26.
It's been a strange few days. I found $10 in the street. I got a free leg of lamb.
You need some time to be free
The Stars” in the gathering night.
Eleventh Hour (www.eleventhhour.co) is the leading provider of litigation support and ediscovery solutions to law firms and corporate law departments. Eleventh Hour collaborates with organization management to optimize delivery of litigation support and ediscovery services that meet legal team needs and client expectations. Eleventh Hour offers strategic and tactical solutions at the litigation support department level, as well as management of litigation cases.
offers attendant beauty lines for both teens and adults (called Volturi and Luna, respectively). The producers even partnered with PRO Beauty Tools to create a branded line of hair tools to help fans easily mimic Twilight‘s characters’ hairstyles.
You will find recipes for every part of the day — from new ideas for breakfast to share with the kids in the weekend to my favourite easy lunch and dinner recipes and, of course, my forever favourite puddings, which I can never get enough of ! There are soups to share, loaves to inspire you to ‘cut and come again’, special recipes your children can prepare and simple yet elegant suppers to serve to friends
Tar Wars is a tobacco-free education program for fourth- and fifth-grade students. The program is designed to teach kids about the short-term, image-based consequences of tobacco use, the cost associated with using tobacco products, and the advertising techniques used by the tobacco industry to market their products to youth.
So then we went back to the ego thing. My ego is causing me problems. She asked me if I really wanted to work on listening to my Soul and less on my ego. She noted that deep down, I’m afraid of losing control. Afraid of what will happen when I simply let go. However, despite these fears, I would say that I want to continue on this path. I want to see where it leads. I want to ‘jump off the cliff’ as it were. I don’t like that I always seemingly need to be in control. That I have to have my fingers in everyone’s pies. I don’t want to be that person that micromanages everything and everyone in a 5 mile radius. I just don’t want that. And while it might be scary, it might be a bit nerve wracking, I’d like to see where this leads. She then asked my soul if it was ‘ready to do war’. Apparently it is, and it seems this will be the next chapter of work for me.
Unlike most bloggers, I'm not much of a writer, either. My Twitter feed is forever telling me that fellow bloggers and people I follow are writing, and as much as I'd like to be able to write as a hobby, I have neither the stamina nor the time- particularly now, when my blog takes up a lot of my free time. I've been told on numerous occasion that I'm a reasonable writer- and on the one-off event that I do write, what I produce isn't always that bad. YA fiction has affected my writing, if ever so slightly- I now know what works, what has been done, and as a reviewer, I know exactly what I want from a book. Perhaps, one day, that'll all help me craft my own novel- but for now, that knowledge remains largely unused, only on the rarity coming out to critique other people's work.
The House of the Spirits, Isabel Allende
I plan for wiggle room when possible, either in shelving or my pant size. Hah.
“Especially when the Christmas is coming, they need more help.
It is common for trade mark attorneys, whose clients have had their trade mark applications rejected, to advise their clients to wait until there has been a material change of circumstances and then to file a fresh application. The question arises as to what happens when the first application is not abandoned until the Board of Appeal level within OHIM and the second refiled application goes to the General Court. How should the General Court approach the second application? Should it ignore what has gone before or is it bound by the earlier OHIM Board of Appeal decision?
My week leading up to the trip to New York was an amazing one. I gathered all of the places here in San Francisco that I hadn't had the time to see, and built an itinerary. There were trips to Kitchenette, Muir Woods, MOMA to see Avedon, Il Cane Rosso, Thursday Farmers Market, Rickhouse, Coffee Bar, Foreign Cinema for brunch, Yerba Buena Gardens with my nephews, and Heaven's Dog. Ginger was out for her brothers wedding (which was fun and beautiful) and in a way we shared a dual vacation. If I had only had that one week to relax, it would've been enough...but New York was looming on the horizon. And in a way it was making me nervous as hell.
He is a great big and younger brother.
No mommy asking C.A.P if he needs to use the potty.
Eli MacKinnon
My task , should i choose to accept it and I do , (lol) is to start with small things that cause me anxiety like taking meesha out for long walks or getting on the bus or even groups and spend time before i leave visualizing the whole event from start to finish. As i feel my anxiety rising I open my eyes and breathe and ground myself then start over and try to get further in the visualization than the last time.
We've always read together after lunch but as Arwen won't be at home after lunch ( sob! ), read alouds this year will be after dinner. Some things change but there will always be read alouds in this house as long as there are children to listen.
a seed or two of scattered potential,
Mike “Mikey” Riedel scribes over at Utah Beer and he’s on the cutting edge of what goes on beer-wise in the Beehive State. (Actually, it was through his blog that I became aware of the book Beer in the Beehive, which I later managed to track down at Red Rock Brewing in Salt Lake City.) Frankly, I don’t know how he manages to keep up with all the news up there but it’s pretty clear he has really good connections or contacts in the world of brewing, especially in the greater Salt Lake City area. If numbers in the current poll continue the way they are and I’m in need of guest columnists for Beer Rant, I’ll be barking up Mikey’s tree shortly after the New Year and when I finally follow through on forming a consortium of rocky mountain beer bloggers, I’ll be asking Mikey to sign on.
will suffer greatly.
He told the Sunday Times: ‘My body is theirs to do what they want with.’
forgiving one another as God has forgiven you in Christ.” (Eph 4:25-27, 30-32) "
Ok, now the last one. About 45 minutes have passed and I chugged some Crystal light, so after a few I'm going for the last new SA Beer in this Variety Pack.
I just want to say that I will try to write more on this side of the web too.
Pink-y Princess
This little painting is in response to the Daily Paintworks Challenge, part one: Using Ultramarine Blue, Burnt Umber and White, paint Abraham Lincoln in a neutral gray. I don't remember ever painting this way before, although I've read about it. Great exercise. Click here to see the many paintings submitted to this challenge: Daily Paintworks Lincoln Challenge.
The advantage of these couplings are manifold: for starters there's the cultural exchange, then, there's also the Latin person's contribution to Britain's multiracial rainbow and last but not least we must factor in the newcomer's professional experience.
Tomorrow land is a promising dystopian/post-apocalyptic novel of true love and survival. It's a stand-alone book, as far as I can tell... but, be sure to check out Mari Mancusi's upcoming dystopian, Alternity. There's a wonderful sneak preview at the end of Tomorrow Land, and I'll be sure to get myself a copy when it comes out!
*Exercises are designed to never be discouraging as all mistakes are explained. This guarantees targeted lessons for your child.
(13) Pick up some homesickness snacks
Toby asked me this morning if I have been enjoying blogging about food.
I’ve found that that is just it: the chance for an unnecessary elevated blood sugar is just not worth whatever the temptation is. Now, does that mean I’ve given up treats cold turkey. Hell no, you’re talking to a former pastry chef here! I’m just really really making it count now (ie, Theo chocolate and only my homemade cookies). I don’t have a bar of chocolate, I have a bite. I don’t have cookies, I have a cookie.
fun toy because it magically “springs to life” and speaks when they approach it. People love to watch their dogs play with this toy because they become so excited – it's very funny to watch, but it's also great exercise and entertainment for your dog.
When I found out she was having twins, I was so incredibly happy for all of them. For their family, this was an answered prayer (many prayers really) and more than one photographer in town wanted to capture their very special time. I had the honor of doing belly art for the Harris's with Keith Dixon Studios doing the photography for this session.
Dame Shirley Bassey was quoted on The Voice of Reason blog as saying: “It's sad that they just let it (Britain) go to rack and ruin, Labour. How? Well, it's violent, isn't it? That's all we read in the papers and see on television”. Why does she think this has happened? "We're letting in too many people. We're an island, for God's sake. And the Britishness seems to have gawwwnnne."
1 red pepper, cut into strips
Philip Glass’ symphonic music has grown commonplace on ballet programs, yet more often than not contemporary choreographers will concoct dense, breathless and safe movement phrases to accompany Glass’ launching and looping scores. Maybe you’ll see costumes that express ‘creativity,’ but for the most part the dance feels to be trying to normalize the music, even after all these years. There is a tamped down effect and it’s rarely fun stuff.
We know they offered her breakfast at the before care program (cereal) but she declined because she was so stuffed from breakfast (cinnamon rolls).
Many of the songs they played the night I saw them are on this album. Among them are the Mexican-flavored opening cut, “I Cried and Cried the Day Doug Sahm Died.” It’s Broussard’s heartfelt tribute to a fellow San Antonio native.
Even thirty years later I am still certain of the date, for there was a young American guest lecturer at UCD who was with us and spent the Sunday searching frantically for a possibility of hearing the Super Bowl on radio, or at least getting the results (the San Francisco 49ers beat the Cincinnati Bengals).
15. Some things you can just photograph with your mind… just enjoy them
The pair of them exited Judy turning left towards the parking lot while the gentleman turned right heading to the gift shop to buy a gift for his newborn son.
Well, his name was Arthur George Owens and he was a very strange hero.
He took off her blind. Unplugged her ears.
In 1937 Britt signed with RCA Victor, where
When we were planning our porch, a friend suggested some kind of canvas curtains for keeping the pollen down, and on rainy days for still being able to use the porch. We also love them for shading the sun when it shines directly in one side of the porch.
Sameer works for a five-star luxury hotel in Delhi and often does shift duties. He lives in a crowded locality with his parents, hardly associates with his neighbors and mostly loves to stay at home on his off days.
Subject Seven by James Moore (ARC) (Penguin Canada)
These next two are on crossfit. While I personally dont like some of the aspects of the business. There are positives to it as it does provide a competitive environment unlike conventional gym. And if administered correctly could be beneficial But there is also a negative of minimal qualifications to become certified. Would you trust your lawyer if their only qualification was sitting in on court hearings then taking a 2 day seminar? I wont ramble on about it here are the links.
Here’s Dan’s theme song.
Now I'm thinking, if I want a narrower back piece, I should just cut 1/2 inch off the sides of either end, below the armscye. There's a bit about this in my Singer book, The Perfect Fit. I'll explore this further later to today. I don't think darts are what I want. David Coffin thinks that darts are "merely evidence of ill-cut side seams" (p. 21) Hmm....
A Surprise Say it With Letters piece from Deb Approx $7-$15. Here is an example that has been altered. The Sky is the limit with these wonderful blank pieces.
The things I did for that cat.
Soon, it turns out that the loft where the alleged rape took place was owned by Boyd’s business partner. Justin also admits that he had motion activated cameras set up in the bedroom and says Christine knew ahead of time that Boyd would be coming home early. Apparently Christine was having affairs with both him and Kevin. There is a tape of her and Kevin having sex (which everyone must watch for some reason), but it appears…rather enthusiastically consensual.
Or at least your desert, cover-up garb.
A dumpster is a steel container that is used for waste disposal and designed in such a way that it allows the emptying of the waste into garbage trucks. A roll off on the other hand is basically a dumpster with an open top, and as the name suggests, has wheels that enable rolling it in place. It is usually larger than a normal dumpster. Therefore, a roll off dumpster is one that encompasses both the two definitions. There are companies that have specialized the in the business of offering rental services for these dumpsters. One should therefore consider some facts before choosing the company that will offer them the best rental deal for their money.
If someone among us sold all he had and gave it away to the poor, to others who had needs, they would be labeled as a nut and I am sure relatives or others would take them to court and seek to have them declared incompetent to handle their affairs. I remember a teacher in a Sunday school class one time stating that he was glad that God didn’t require Christians to sacrifice in their giving. In fact he seemed to indicate that it was irresponsible for a follower of Christ to do so. This was quite a while back and I remember biting my tongue, holding my thoughts back because I didn’t want to cause controversy.
Which Lady Love of Clark's is your favorite? Clark Kent's Love life has always been complicated. So much Drama with Lana, Chloe is like a sister who has always had feelings for Clark, and Lois has liked Clark but then like turned into feelings in time because they were destined to be together.
I love Wednesdays but I didn’t love today! I own my own business so I work every day, I am also working on writing a book, being the “best mom in the world” and volunteering for a charity working on their 5km run/walk. Most days I am being pulled 16 different ways. And on top of it all dealing with my eating addiction. Which is where I turn to when I am stressed out! Today I could have ate a horse – I might have if one passed by me. The stress level had hit the roof, one of our major sponsors in the walk might just be pulling out, the kids are nuts as can be running wild and crazy!
“Well, well, well,” he begins, invoking crowd hatred. “Look who’s on top of the heap now. And I’m not just talking about your fat mommas!”
Nik deftly snatched the item out of the air, noticing as he did so, that there was a rather large scorch mark on the glass wall behind the desk. He filed it away and looked down at the item now cupped in the palm of his gloved hand. It was a small data disc, the kind used to store temporary data such as holo or voice recordings. He looked back up at Wro’bel.
And now I’m that much more excited to think about what my next accomplishment — be it in Crossfit or in life — may be.
Weaving, etc... you get the point.
I don't know how the divide-to-conquer process can be turned against our political class. Coalition majorities are unstable, owing to the voting power of marginal blocs in a bare-majority coalition, but the political riposte is to form a new coalition by enlisting new blocs to replace the querulous ones, or better yet, to use the prospect of being outside a potential new majority to quell any embryonic uprising. Note how hoary this tactic is: Federalist Alexander Hamilton used it to persuade New York to join in ratifying the Constitution.
- a plausible set of reasons why this naturalistic method could be mistaken for something more ground-breaking,
North Korea will release a statement in a while. They’re just fixing their telegraph.
After I took them out of the oven I sprinkled a mixture of sugar, cinnamon, nutmeg and ginger on half of them. And sprinkled salt and pepper on the other half.
For the reasons stated we are constrained to affirm the judgment in this cause, with costs against the appellant, with the modification that the defendant be required to indemnify Eustaquia Montage in the sum of P50, instead of P30, as judged by the court below. So ordered.
Easy to use thanks to the handy pump dispenser, each bottle of Xen-Tan Dark Lotion gives an average of 6-7 full face and body tans.
SNAPSHOT-U.S. lawmakers close to deal on debt: Here is what is happening on Sunday as lawmakers and the White House race to broker a deal to raise the country’s $14.3 trillion borrowing cap by Tuesday’s deadline and avoid default on obligations…. – Reuters, 7-31-11
I'm realizing most of these career pursuits would not have made any money. A puppeteer! A mime! These are my Plan-Bs!
And thus, if ye will not nourish the word, looking forward with an eye of faith to the fruit thereof, ye can never pluck of the fruit of the tree of life. (Alma 32:40)
that rises from within and shines
The local grands used to stay with us over New Year's eve but since they have grown to teen hood can now amuse themselves at home leaving Jim and I to be old fogies and go to bed at our usual times. Jim about 10 and me about 11.
Gently roll the loaf out of the cloth and put it seam-side down on the baking sheet or pizza stone. Slash the top several times with a sharp bread knife or a razor (I’ve never used a razor myself but have read that this works too). Cook for about 30 minutes until golden. Let cool thoroughly before cutting.
When Tara and Mick went their separate ways I was shocked! But I was glad that it worked out in the end and it allowed Tara to let her guard down and see that she really could trust Mick and Nathan now has a male role model in his life to look up to. The way it was written let the story flow and develop; nothing felt forced or rushed. I loved this read from start to finish and I can’t wait to get my hands on the next one in the series. I would give this four and a half stars if I could.
Once they were aboard the hulk, prisoners could expect to be robbed by the officers, their new cell mates, and threatened with flogging or the Black Hole for any breach of discipline. Prisoners with money could gain better conditions, but when a prisoner died, even his body could be sold for dissection.
Track everyone in the process.
Research from Kammeyer-Mueller and Wanberg shows that higher job satisfaction and commitment, both of which can impact performance, result from good organizational socialization. Employees in today’s workforce want to feel they have an impact in their work, know they’re making a difference in the organization, and see career growth opportunities in their jobs. The more they feel valued, the more engaged and productive they’ll be and the more likely they’ll stick around. Clearly retaining productive staff is a key business driver in today’s competitive marketplace. Creating a good first impression through onboarding will help make employees feel valued and assimilated into an organization’s culture.
The amount of Vitamin A in a pumpkin is staggering...the vitamin A will help keep your eyes healthy! Pumpkins are also a source of Vitamin C, Vitamin E, potassium, manganese, copper, riboflavin (a B vitamin), iron, folate, B6, niacin and more! Whew that is one hard working vegetable!
There are a lot more festivities during the day, but we were fairly frazzled after two hours of crowds, omelettes and the flirting tapenade man. Oh, and the petting zoo:
I've said this a million times, but painting mirrors is the easiest project. Just slap on two or three coats, let it dry and then clean up the mirror with a wet rag. The dried paint wipes right off the glass. If you need a little extra help with the edges, a razor works great.
Avia Sneakers
Long-term illness, however, skews a relationship. Over the years, our world kept getting smaller and smaller, trapping us in a life where neither his needs nor mine were being met. In that constricted world, small betrayals loomed large. Small disagreements seemed insurmountable. And there was guilt galore. After he died, I worked through all of those leftover problems, came to a greater understanding of our relationship and what his ill health had done to us, and finally realized we both acted the only way we could in such an untenable situation. I also dealt with the soul searing pain of loss, with the confusing physical symptoms. (Like falling in love, falling in grief causes changes in hormones and brain chemistry, and creates incredible stress, but unlike love, you can’t regulate those changes with sex. Unless you’re into necrophilia.)
Well, I am now where I am and as I think of the fate that has befallen the poor fellow, I am suddenly attacked by a rush of mixed feelings: I feel sadness at taking a life, then again, I feel the joy of accomplishment and fulfillment, I have done Lagos and the larger society a favour ensuring one-less maniac on our roads. I think of the gladness in the hearts of other normal rational people, the peace of mind that I have created since they know there is one less-speed monkey on a motorbike, smile as a sense of accomplishment envelopes me.
24And if we have not, in fact, done this designedly and with purpose, having in our minds the fear that in time to come your children might say to our children, What have you to do with the Lord, the God of Israel?
As for Thanksgiving: the Practice-- I am not as accomplished at that. But I know this...
He sired two decades of litters born in the huge wooden shed,
an old gray blanket, with
Because: it trumps, realigns and amiably ushers gay filmmaking forward - and it looks and feels effortless in doing so. (Yes, it is universal, but it is also certified Gay Cinema - its level of success means it manages a multitude of things to a great many different types of people.) The two well-written, and entirely real, characters at the centre of this big-hearted compact-romance have hardly, if ever, been explored in this way. (More on Weekend here - mini comments, along with some thoughts on Pariah.)
At the cliff end, the land plummets down to the town. One possible means of descent, the East Hill Cliff Railway, has ceased running for the day which leaves me with the only other option: a steep flight of stairs, the treads of which are too wide and the risers too low to comfortably descend with any sort of rhythm. Sneaking along the back of houses, through narrow gaps between the tall, thin buildings, the stairs emerge at the Stade, home to Europe’s largest beach-launched fishing fleet. The black-weatherboarded net shops, like tall sentry boxes, could, I suppose, be described as quaint, attracting the tourists as they do, but this is still very much a working beach. I scrunch across the shingle, weaving between the weatherbeaten boats and rusting winches and bulldozers that drag the fleet up the beach, past tangled webs of nets, and stacks of battered brightly coloured fish boxes.
According to the criminal complaint, Hill wrote checks from the union checking account to himself and used the money for personal expenses. An audit indicated that Hill allegedly wrote 74 checks to himself on the Local 76C checking account.
Now, as it turns out, he and Leah are together again. I am now in a place where I have to interact with him knowing how easily I was replaced (or I can wonder if she has been there all along).
She calls, says she has to give me a whole bag of IV fluid first so baby and mine heart rate doesn't go down. That takes 30 minuets. Than takes over another 30 minuets for the anesthesiologist to get there. Once she is in there the contractions are so so intense. My whole body is shaking, I'm literally convulsing and can't help it. I ask Davey for a barf bag. I didn't throw up but really felt like I was going to. Contractions are about every 30-45 seconds apart. I feel a lot more pressure with each one, not quit yet like I was ready to push, but just feel more pressure, like the baby is moving down.
I eventually got everyone going and moving. CPT came home, and was noisy getting ready. I'm guessing he's always like that. I went into Joe's room to sleep with him. And fell back asleep. We both slept till around 10:30 or 11am. I guess he was sick too! And we both felt a lot better when we woke up. Still sick ish, but not as bad.
"Water I can handle," I said, relieved I wouldn't have to drink any foul fluid. Sign me up!"
Quetta police said the body of the Muslim convert was found wrapped in plastic in an orchard with a note saying he had been killed by the Taliban. A sharp knife was used to sever Dale’s head from the body, although it was not immediately clear if that was the cause of his death.
I write this to you, who are weary of prayer. To you, who used to believe in the power of prayer and now are not so sure. To you, who believe in God, but are frustrated with how you pray and seem to feel as though God has forgotten you. To you dear friend, I write. God has not forgotten you. I am a witness of that! I can stand before you today and say,"God has heard my prayers! God has lifted my head to look up and see how the impossible is possible!" To you my friend, I say PRAY. Pray to our great God who loves you, has purpose in all things, has a reason for your trial, has understanding where you lack, has victory when it feels hopeless. For it is when you pray... that one day you will be able to shout, "BREAKTHROUGH!"
Disclosure: I received the RediScan (and the temporal thermometer) mentioned in the review for free. These are my personal opinions.
To begin with I forget my bag at home. This meant that I didn't have Mason's food, Helen's snack or my wallet. We used to have a membership to the museum, but let it lapse in favor of making a small contribution whenever we visit, which is about three or four times a month and most of the free Saturdays as well.
A huge dishonorable mention goes to the Arizona legislature for even entertaining the idea of allowing women to be fired from their jobs if they use birth control.
And that’s just one of my books. When I consider all of them, my gratitude is unending. I am grateful I never had to twice attend my mother’s funeral as poor Bob Stark did in More Deaths Than One. I’m grateful I have not yet had to deal with an epidemic so severe that the entire state of Colorado needs to be quarantined as described in A Spark of Heavenly Fire. I am grateful that I am not being held captive in an underground installation run by a quasi-government agency as are my heroes in Light Bringer, which will be released in the spring of 2010.
"I don't think it's going to kill jobs because you need the people to do the work no matter what," said Walter, owner of Highland Park Furniture, which has a license to use the trade name Macy's Furniture & Mattress Clearance Center. "But it might hurt profits, and it sounds better to say it's going to hurt jobs than hurt profits."
But as I understand this dilemma, we are not completely isolated. Though we cannot by our own powers escape our limits, we are subject to correction from, so to speak, the outside. I can hardly expect everybody to believe, as I do (with due caution), that inspiration can come from the outside. But inspiration is not the only way the human enclosure can be penetrated. Nature too may break in upon us, sometimes to our delight, sometimes to our dismay.
THE PLOT: Here is how I think David Diamond & David Weissner, writers of this film, came up with the plot:
It. Was. Amazing.
The album closer ‘Arena Rock Encore with Full Cast’ is firmly, as the title implies, tongue in cheek. “So many bands, that’s the aim, to get to the arena. When did that become the standard goal, or even a tangible concept for an indie rock band?” asks Ryan.
In this first photo, we're all opening our books to the pages we'll be reading. I was reading from Thirteen Reasons Why, which is hard to read aloud by myself, so Alexandra read with me.
Now I need enough for the occasional movie, then I will be happy.
I think I watch too much TV. Or is it the TV I do watch, has the same annoying commercials, I forget which?
"It's the crisis". A succint comment from Mithu, one of the co-owners of the Marmite Bazar restaurant which sits in a quiet street south of Montmartre. He wanted to explain why I was the only customer so far that lunchtime, but he needn't have worried. "It's much busier in the evening" he explained, "sometimes we don't even open at lunchtimes". I reassured him, telling him that I'd been here before on a Saturday evening and had loved the food and simple atmosphere and had decided simply to enjoy the first warm rays of springtime and make a 15 minute pilgrimage on foot from work.
Some had gunshot wounds and others had been attacked with knives, according to medical sources.
Yes, I’m spinning around and around and around and around and around,
It was as though the universe new that there was something not quite right this morning. Yesterday was not a happy day in the house, and I think that seeped into my bones because when I woke up this morning, I just felt drawn and sad. I couldn’t exactly pin-point why – it was simply that things did not feel right in my world.
The guys showed up bright and early at 9am bundled up against the cold weather.
And hints point to the roof of the tower
June 7, 2011 — FBI forensic chemist confirms chloroform residue in trunk of Casey’s car but admits household cleaning products leave traces of chloroform. Dog handler describes dog alerting to human decomposition in the trunk, as well as Caylee’s playhouse.
I say that because Wildrose isn’t so much a party as it is an unwieldy and diverse coalition made up of libertarians, social conservatives, populists and Alberta nationalists. These are groups which don’t necessarily get along. In fact, they sometimes hate each other. The only thing keeping them united right now is that, for a variety of reasons, they all share a mutual dislike for the Alberta Tories.
as dawn out of the bookshelves;
The YouTube Downloader interface is intuitive and easy to use. Users simply copy and paste a video URL, then click the Download button.
Worn to dinner and drinks
BLITZER: Let’s go to Miami. We have another question.
To a bright, azure dome.
Agatha McGee is a brash and unapologetic no-nonsense spinster. She’s spent her entire life devoted to her Catholic faith and 46 years teaching her sixth grade students. To the small town of Staggerford, MN, Miss McGee is as much an institution as St. Isadore’s, where she teaches, and even the Church, itself. Everyone seems to have put Agatha in a neat little box, expecting her to retire and take up knitting and bingo.
In a case strikingly similar to Petitioner’s case, the Eighth Circuit concluded that the petitioner’s double jeopardy claim was procedurally barred from federal habeas review. See Wallace v. Lockhart, 12 F.3d 823, 826-27 (1994). In Wallace, the petitioner and a codefendant were convicted in Arkansas state court of felony murder and the underlying felony of kidnapping. Id. at 825. In the codefendant’s petition for post-conviction relief, an Arkansas court overturned her kidnapping conviction as violative of the Double Jeopardy clause of the Fifth Amendment. Id. The petitioner subsequently filed a second petition for post-conviction relief raising the double jeopardy issue. Id. The Arkansas courts, however, refused to overturn the petitioner’s kidnapping conviction because the petitioner had failed to raise his double jeopardy claim until his second state petition for post-conviction relief. Id. The petitioner then sought federal habeas relief claiming, inter alia, that despite the procedural bar, the failure of the federal courts to entertain his petition would result in a fundamental miscarriage of justice. Id. at 826. The Eighth Circuit disagreed, concluding that because the petitioner did not claim factual innocence of the kidnapping offense, he failed to come within the fundamental miscarriage of justice exception. Id. at 827.
Diversity in literature is an important topic that is being actively debated across the publishing industry. Everyone should be able to open up a book and read about a character who looks like them, shares their beliefs and/or life experiences, and who can serve as a role model for their own existence. That same diversity needs to be reflected on the covers of the books, and in the photos of their authors.
The next one I wanted to do some kind of hybrid with printing some word-art brushes on a piece of letter paper. Did the photo series and put a word on quote on that too. Got to use some scraps and some other little tidbits.
One gorgeous Arctic summer day, my dad, sister and I took a trip. We finally found an opportunity to travel around forty miles up the beach of the Arctic Ocean to "see the sights." Nearly a hundred years ago, the ancestors of the Eskimo people in our village lived in another community. Their houses were made of driftwood and sod and they lived entirely off the land. I can't express the wonder of seeing firsthand these remains of Eskimo history. The Lord truly blessed our little journey -- and He gave me a beautiful day for capturing these timeless scenes, besides!
As many as 64 percent of the interviewees said they avoid speaking dialects due to their “rustic pronunciation”, according to the survey.
I listen to very few and chances are, you aren’t part of that elite.
Born on today's date, Red Ruffing.
I wish Crown the best in the future. Until I’m done I will do my best to hand everything off smoothly and find another job doing what I love to do. I worry about my future when I’m turned down at yet another job, but I know God will provide a position for me to provide for my family. Hopefully it’s before my current role at Crown is finished.
We are not what other people say we are. We are who, we say we are.
Philip Hamburger, a professor at Columbia Law School, argues that it is unconstitutional for the federal government to be giving out waivers to businesses and unions from the provisions of Obamacare. They have already granted 783 waivers from one of the provisions over organizations and the health insurance they must provide.
In this episode, Jim was talking to a 12-year-old girl from the School of Rock whose favorite band is Neutral Milk Hotel. The other 12-year-old girl’s favorite band is Paramore – not quite as wild, but still a solid choice.
Mario Vs. Donkey Kong 2: Advance Of The Minis Nintendo DS
Yet we often celebrate those that can stand up and preach, those that can stand up and lead sung worship on Sunday and those that do cold contact evangelism. I am drawing a distinction between those that lead sung worship and those that play in pubs/clubs etc because I think the audience is different and perhaps the purpose as well. Although they are both artists. But what I am really thinking about is what about our artists in the world? Those that draw, take photographs, cook great food, write poetry, write novels, sketch, make models etc for the world to see…yet they often get the back seat. But the church needs them, because these people are speaking into the culture we are in and they are engaging with it in a different way. The are reaching people who the preacher alone could never reach.
"The Old City?" If anything, Jashi's face tightened further as she spoke.
I have always been one to change hairstyles, as well as the colour occasionally. I go through periods, I finally grow it out to the length I like and get the colour I like. Then I get bored with it, go into the hair salon and say take it off. I ask them what style they think will suit the shape of my face. Very rarely have I absolutely hated the cut.
01/27/2011 BUY 0.02 xauusd 1320.240 01/31/2011 1327.17 +13.82
The boy is napping so I am relaxing for a bit, then we are having my brother, his g/f, my sister, and her b/f over for dinner! Happy Weekend!
- Instead of one 9x13 pan, I baked the recipe in two 8x8 pans because I wanted to make sure the middle got baked through.
6) Ply until the bobbin is full; break the ends off, wrap them back around their own core, and tuck their ends in (see #2 for why).
That said, if your curiosity was peaked by the preview or the recent buzz, or if you're anticipating being dragged along by a friend, don't worry: you won't be complaining about wanting that couple of hours of your life back. In fact, you should be able to enjoy everything The Hunger Games movie has to offer with only a few small points of explanation, should your movie buddy have already read the book.
Thomas Monson was a bishop at age 22, a mission president at age 31, and became a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles at age 36. In our day, these are remarkably young ages for any of these major leadership positions. They represent a lifetime of service in the ministry.
I thought about how great I would look in front of gym boyfriend doing my calf presses. I hopped on the seat, pulled the pin out and began to scream "OWIE OWIE OWIE" at the top of my lungs during the peak lunch hour workout time slot. My ankles had snapped back, I thought my achilles tendons had left my body. Gym boyfriend grinned as I turned beet red and contemplated knocking myself out with a dumb bell. Whitney pulled my mangled limbs from the machine that could be used for capitol punishment. I suffered no serious injury, I only looked ridiculous.
If the cheese is neufchâtel
Most of us just assume life will go according to some rules. We will marry our prince charming, establish a home, fill the home with the children we desire, graduate them from college, attend their weddings, bounce grand babies on our knees while enjoying retirement. Life rarely goes according to our Garden of Eden ideas. Heaven will hold that perfect vision, not this sin-filled world.
it's taking my thoughts from paper to lips
Page Item Description Price
Om falls in love with one of the big stars of the time, Shantipriya or Shanti, played by Deepika Padukone. Naturally, since this is after all Bollywood, such a romance is destined to face obstacles, as Shantipriya is a big star and Om is a nobody.
My students were so cute today. They were very sad about Spring Break did not want to go. I had kids telling me that 10 days was too many days not to go to school and be away from me and their friends. I told them to enjoy the time. I also gave them some homework over the break and guess what? They were excited...totally pumped and thrilled. I was shocked...are my kiddos going crazy?
Worth is most beautiful
Now, don't get me wrong I love a good story about the creepiness of religion and priests going all badass on Satan himself. But at the same time I feel with the constant release of these movies I get increasingly more immune to the body cracking and the constant big bad voice coming out of creepy young girls. It just doesn't do it for me, unless we're talking strictly about the classic The Exorcist, which it's behind the scenes story is even creepier then the film itself.
The approval, long in coming – over 18 months, and aided by a micro-loan through a program backed by Boston Beer Company – seemed a bit anti-climactic, but it was celebratory nonetheless.
4. THE MAN WHO LAUGHS (1928) at the Niles Essanay Silent Film Museum. Again, I could put pretty much everything I saw at Niles on this list, but I had to choose one, and this is it.
Z: "AAAAAAAAAAAAAA man, oh man, Nathanael, AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA, oh man. Come on, I was sleeping man"
Reduced hearing can be caused by many different factors, but one of the simplest, yet overlooked factors is ear wax. Ear wax is produced by the ear itself and is meant to protect the ear from water or infection. The amount of wax produced varies by each person, and unfortunately, some people are more prone to having an excess amount of wax than others.
Nom, nom, nom. (That’s the sound the zombies make, too…)
Secular, worldly images. Figurative Islamic Art. In Spain. 10th c. Griffins, Lions, Ivory, men on Horse. Regarding pictures of Mohammed, Muslims feared doing.
The most powerful chambering in semiautomatic pistols people actually CARRY, is probably 10mm (I often carry one myself); which fires up to a 180gr .40 caliber bullet, at up to 1350fps, for around 730ftlbs of energy; somewhere in between the .357 magnum and the .44 magnum revolver rounds (about the same as the much less common .41 magnum).
Field Green Salad With Haru’s signature house dressing
Goulding’s entrancing voice filled the small theatre flawlessly as she offered a glimpse into her life with a home-made film playing in the background showing her gratitude to the fans. It all seems rather amazing work from someone who left university and escaped to London with nothing but a backpack, a guitar and a head filled with dreams.
While writing started out as therapy for a grieving soul, it is now something I must do to keep all the exciting characters quiet. I love it! I only wish it could have developed without such dark beginnings, but nonetheless, my mother would be proud.
OSK Research said it preferred not to speculate about the rumours “as again, disappointments may be in store” although DRB-HICOM could be preferred as “Volkswagen’s production line-up could be injected into the Proton facility in Tanjung Malim to establish a production hub for the Asean market.”
Of course, I'm sure you recall hearing the story of the tragedy when Tom went behind the mower to show them another detail about it. Having failed to put it out of gear, the mower moved backward toward Tom, crushing him to death against the chainlink fence that was in place to secure all the mowers and equipment used at the golf course.
I've jazzed up my blog with some new color, how about you? Are you ready for a bunch of new visitors and followers? The original party invitation is here, but to recap here's how it works:
When I try such things, I'm lucky enough to end up with a canvas that hasn't morphed into a big glob of shit brown.
4 Clinton Street south of Houston
Something for us to ponder. It’s been running through my mind lately, and I thought I’d share it.
The emptiness of a pitch-black tunnel
Continuing on with the final part of the series- Many people, both foreign and national do not realize the allowed deductions nor do they plan for them or receive the proper documentation that will assist them when selling throughout the period that they own the property. So, here is another you can easily plan for:
My point has been proven over and over again, people still stab me in the back to get popular. Nothings changed. it’s still highschool. Then again I work in a club full of 140 immature females. It’s like high school hell. The x rated version. Anyway what did happen to me in high school? Well I finally found out exactly who everyone made me out to be. So this guy Noah liked me, and I had a huge crush on him. That is: until we got really stoned and made out apparently. Then came the vicious phone call, calling me a whore. Then came the daily bull shit of people yelling slut at me every day as I was minding my own business. The came the rumour that I slept with my friend Iain. Apparently I let him fuck me against a wall and he got the name Spiderman and was a total fucking hero. And of course I was a huge slut. All at the age of 16. Right, this cherry still remained to be popped. Of course I’m finding out now that Iain told everyone we had sex in not so many words “I had a condom when I went in there and now it’s gone”. fucking men. No wonder i use them and take all their cash now. Of course Noah’s ex girlfriend, one of my closest friends was furious that he liked me. And of course it was my fault. So here come the vicious rumours about me. Of course any gossip is great gossip. If it involved fucking then even better. And if course years down the road when some nude pictures of me were found those spread around the high school clique like crazy. Funny how these people still even cared. I can honestly say that my life hasn’t been the easiest but I’m grateful that I’m not some suburban chick who just wants to get married to anyone she went to high school with, get knocked up and start popping out babies. I’m meant for much more than that. Being an entertainer it’s a long and lonesome road. But since I don’t trust anyone I think I’ll be okay. So after hearing all these awful things that were all started by people I called friends. Can I find it in myself to forgive Noah. I want to be a bigger person but if my past has taught me anything it’s that people are two faced. There must be some sort of alterior motive. What is this some ploy to get laid? is he doing this for his own purposes so he can stop feeling guilty. Hell I don’t even trust him enough to tell him any of the details of my life. There is no way I’m becoming gossip again if this ‘friendship’ goes sour. Maybe I just hate men. I find this is a common trend in my friendships or with men I like. I sabotage relationships. Every single time I like a guy i find a way to make him hate me. I guess I’m just protecting myself. Or I date guys that I don’t even really like all that much. The strange thing is I appreciate finally getting the answers I needed. the weird thing is when i found all this out, the ash tray on my coffee table suddenly cracked in half. out of no where. wasn’t even touching it. Was this some weird sign that something in me has finally been broken? That I was due for a change. The change I’ve wanted to make so badly all these years? I grabbed my phone to call one of my only friends to tell her about all this and my phone disconnected our call. So I continued to talk to Noah. Maybe I didn’t have all the answers i needed yet. I finally got an apology I could understand after hearing the details of what really happened. The things I had no idea about. I’m trying to find it in myself not to hold him responsible because at the end of the day I make my own choices. One of the things I’m learning about myself if not to let little things get to me. I guess I always did sweat the small stuff. We were just kids and I can’t be bitter about this like I always am. It takes a big person to apologize when they know they were wrong. A lesson i learned very recently after losing a friend to my own stupid behaviours. It takes an even bigger person to forgive someone who has wronged them. The stripper in me is telling me that he’s just another guy. another liar. Whats left of the human in me wants to forgive. I’ve been trying so hard to find the human side of me but it’s been hard. I don’t know how to let people into my life but I’m tired of shutting them out. I’m tired of being stabbed in the back though. I think everyone deserves a second chance, I know I’ve been given my fair share. I don’t think I will ever allow the people from my past into my life but hopefully forgiving Noah is the right move.
the hour I first believed.
Here are a few ways to build your Integrity:
* Spellbinders Nestabillities: Labels 10
This is why I make my circles with the intent and statement that they are meant to keep anything and anyone malign out, but let harmless entities in. You never know what a cat will do!
Or would it be better to have “Lewis Schaffer: It was the last thing he did”
Level 19: Mastery: +48%, Accuracy: +114.
Oil - little, for frying
The next couple of days were filled with fun activities. Auntie Kate arrived and we spent time watching Tangled and making our first beach trip of the year. We now have another thing to add to the list of things my fearless son is oddly scared off. Sand. He was not a fan. I think because it shifts under his feet, and being 1, he’s not too steady to start. Once we got him calm though he had a ball digging in the sand. One of his sand molds is in the shape of a duck so I practiced with him saying “quack, quack”. Except when Ryan says it, its more like, “man grunt, man grunt.” So we’re close…;) Grams took the kids to the park to burn off some steam and Isabel of course made Grams push her on the swing until Grams could push no more. And Isabel showed Grams how she “flies.” Without shoes of course….because that’s how she rolls.
I’ve been using Bourjois’ 10 Hour Sleep Effect in shade 72, Rosé Clair every now and then to mix it up…
I've been 'around' in the writing business (and had enough disappointments, trust me!) to know this doesn't necessarily mean a cause for huge celebration ... having an agent doesn't necessarily spell success or even publication. My last brief experience with an agent was frankly, a disaster. But what it does mean is that someone, a professional, who knows the business, likes my new book enough to feel they can give it a chance.
- Engineer’s Motto
“Should you wish to discuss the self-publishing option in more detail, please do not hesitate to contact us.”
Who does not require these skills?
Presently, loving someone has yet to pay off as being a lucrative investment
Tertullian comments that he removed the author of The Acts of Paul and Thecla from his position as presbyter for writing “writings that wrongly go under Paul’s name.”[90] Serapion, Bishop of Antioch in 180 AD, is recorded by Eusebius as writing Concerning the so-called Gospel According to Peter, a refutation in which Serapion wrote “We receive both Peter and the other apostles as Christ, but the writings which falsely bear their names we reject.”[91] Origen rejected the Doctrine of Peter since it was “not included among the books of the Church and…not a writing or Peter nor of anyone else inspired by the Spirit of God.”[92] The Muratorian Fragment records that “there is said to be another letter in Paul’s name to the Laodiceans, and another to the Alexandrians, [both] forged in accordance with Marcion’s heresy, and many others which cannot be received into the catholic church, since it is not fitting that poison should be mixed with honey”[93] and “the Apocalypse of John we also receive, and that of Peter, which some of our people will not have to be read in church. But the Shepherd was written by Hermas in the city of Rome quite recently, in our own times, when his brother Pius occupied the bishop’s chair in the church of the city of Rome; and therefore it may be read indeed, but cannot be given out to the people in the church either among the prophets, since their number is complete, or among the apostles at the end of the times.”[94] Clearly the early church had several leaders who thought very poorly of pseudepigraphal works and fought against their acceptance in the church.
I've had a little bit for some time and I've been wanting to do a canvas blackboard for ages so when some of the new Riley blake fabrics came in to work last week I just couldn't help myself!
The two of them never spoke.
Make It Easy
Its hexagram is the pentecostal fire of the darkness burning in the vacuum bond
On many occasions you have publicly stated that the diversity of New York City is our greatest strength, yet your words ring hollow, as we examine the lack of diversity within your administration. Furthermore, there is a complete omission of African American men in charge of any high level agency. You have four high level vacancies that deal predominantly with people of color. You now have an obligation to ensure that those positions be filled by individuals who represent the people those agencies serve.
This week marks the end of Iwona Guest Designing with us here at TPE!!
Our private investigation company treats each case and client with total confidentiality and privacy. We are a trusted professional practicing investigative corporation based in Texas and licensed by the State of Texas in private investigation with fully licensedprivate investigators and private detectives.
Do you ever get into Gene v. Environment debates about intelligence or personality? I'd love to hear about your theories about how genes and environment shape our lives in the comments.
My heart is shattered; I am barely making it here,
But seriously, my older son had no problem gobbling down a few! He said, Hey Mom, I love those pie cookies! Guess he thought they were like whoopie pies!
Since brown sugar is not readily available in Kerala, mamma substitutes it with 3/4th cup of sharkara paani (jaggery syrup) or a cup of jaggery. If using the syrup, make sure you use 2 cups of boiling water instead on 1 3/4.
As you can see, my driveway is steep (steeper than it looks in the photo) and long. It continues up and out of the range of the photo to the right for another good 30 feet, at least. Her 12-year-old daughter and her little brother (about 3 or 4) went sledding down the driveway the past couple of days - having a great time on their little plastic sleds.
I had the laziest weekend ever. It was great on Friday, but by Sunday evening...when I realized that I still hadn't done anything productive all weekend...I was feeling awful. It seems like the less I do, the lazier I act. Like my laziness just feeds on itself.
This is a fun bright card for the beginning of Spring. Pull out some bright colors and join us with our sketch challenge. Now it is time to head on over to Sharon Wheet's blog to see what she did with the sketch this week.
For the decoction, boil 1-2 teaspoons in a cup of water and take three times a day. The liquid extract should be taken in a 1:1 solution of 60% alcohol at .6-1.2 ml three times a day. Tinctures in a 1:5 solution of 60% alcohol, with 1-4 ml of the cotyledons three times a day.
Hi everyone!! I am back! At last ;)
I hated sweaters, too. I felt confined, uncomfortable, and restricted in them, just as I did in my hometown. However, a sweater is a sensible article of clothing and, like the beige family of colors, is another element in the wardrobe of the moderate. So, the sweater became another irritant in my life, something forever being sold to me by family and clothing salesmen. Put all the elements together, and the worst offense imaginable was a family member promoting something like a "nice, camel sweater." You know what not to buy me as a gift.
These are just some of the issues I’ve learned about as I studied, researched, and interacted with members of our refugee community and those who work with them.
— Paulann Petersen from The Voluptuary, Lost Horse Press, 2010
surrounds you
After chilling the dough and making the balls, poke the end of a wooden spoon into each cake pop,
Helllooo everyone!
woolen jumpers and wet toes
With meat still in oven, turn broiler on high to get skin to crisp. Watch closely, and use tinfoil to cover areas that darken quickly. After 15 to 20 minutes the skin should be crispy.
Good news on the computer front...so far. I was able to restore the backup I did on December 22...and my Computer Geeky Dude told me yesterday that things are looking good about retrieving most of the data I lost from the now-defunct hard drive! I will know for sure today just how much was save-able and will keep you posted...thanks for all the sympathy, encouraging emails and offers of help...I really do appreciate it!
So keeping with the competition theme, this year I was invited by Baking Mad to go head to head with 14 other bloggers. The challenge was to create my ultimate Valentines treat, using a minimum of 3 ingredients from a mystery box of goodies I was sent.
I think I'll take my Mom a can of TAB next time I go to her house. I don't think she has a clue that TAB is available in stores these days, so I can't wait to see the look on her face when she see's it.
Why I read it to the end: Short and simple. And it was about vampires.
CIRCUIT
lomyl tells me that i can't be afraid (knowing that whatever it is that i experience will be felt by my partners, GOOD and BAD), otherwise i will stop growing.
All stories apart, now let the images speak.
idea of the value of money.”
Royal Ascot is the preeminent fixture in the flat racing calendar. Every jockey, trainer and owner prays, hopes and dreams for a winner on the hallowed Ascot turf. The world’s best horses test their natural talent at the Berkshire course in the hope of being recognised as a genuine champion. For punters, picking out the winners is as difficult, however the Stable View Blog tipping guide will guarantee you success over the five days of the Royal showpiece tipping the big winners in the big races.
At this point, everything goes to shit. Or rather, it goes to vomit.
The name is hidden on this one as it is a surprise swap, I used the embroidery feature on my sewing machine for the first time to add the name. I always have swappers guilt when I see how wonderful and creative some of the name tags are that get made for this event, there are some very clever crafters out there; alas I am not one of them! I do like the Denyse Schmidt fabric I used for this tag, perfect red, white and blue to suit the colour theme set for this year.
With the baby in one hand and the phone in the other, my wife stood over me shaking as she nervously called the emergency number. Not wanting her to drop the baby, I asked her to hand me the phone. As I chatted with 911, I looked at my leg (or what I could see of it, as I didn’t exactly have the best view) and tried to figure out what had I done.
But researchers at the Tokyo-based Regional Institute for Global Change (RIGC) have maintained their forecast for the return of La Nina conditions towards the autumn.The Climate Prediction Centre of the US National Weather Services too had come out with an outlook recently suggesting the return of La Nina later this year.In what is a good sign for the Indian monsoon, the RIGC has also said that the La Nina would be accompanied by a ‘weak positive Indian Ocean Dipole’ from August to November.
I’m not looking for someone to whom I’m joined at the hip, I don’t want someone interfering with me when I’m trying to do pottery, wear matching zip-up cardies and go on tandem bike rides, but it would be lovely to find someone who will chuckle at my little jokes, sample my cooking (a brave man indeed), appreciate all my quirks….. actually as I’m writing this I realise I haven’t a clue what I’m looking for….but the truth is I do miss a cuddle and it would be good to have someone to share stuff with sometimes.
Western Conference Quarterfinals:
I ventured out today throught the snow-covered streets to TOYS R US to return some things dear daughter got for Christmas. With most places have such strict return policies, I realized - HOLY COW - some people probably bought these things a few weeks before Christmas and my time is running out!
What can we do? We can assess where we stand and then decide what we can do. But we cannot ignore it and abdicate our responsibility.
When I got to the Gladney office, I went into the conference room to wait. I was letting Ruthie Mekdes wander around in the room. She is very curious. She wandered into the hall but was still in my line of vision. When she walked out where I couldn't see her, I got up to bring her back to me. I took a couple of steps to where I could see the offices in the hall perpendicular to the one we were in. I glanced up at someone coming toward us and immediately knew it was Mekdes' mom. She walked to Mekdes and picked her up and held her. I went to grab the camera to try to capture the moment and started to sob.
Anyhow, I talked it up to the boy over the weekend. He was vaguely interested. This morning he was downright squirmy as we worked our way through 'What I know about maps and globes' and 'What I'd like to learn about maps and globes.'
Roaming Buffaloes’ Rooftop Brunch at HSBC Tower – 10:00 a.m. – 1:00 p.m.
A couple of days go by and I start to wonder about what that chemo treatment in the brain will be like for Elisa. I do a little research. You can't find treatment information without knowing what is being treated. So I had to find out what they were looking for: leptomeningeal metastases, or LM for short. LM has a lot of symptoms, most of which are the same as the side effects of chemotherapy. This causes them to go unnoticed a lot. It also meant that our neurologist didn’t realize that Elisa had several symptoms that were on LM’s list as well as the placement of the brain tumors. It is a fine line between trying to be an advocate for a patient you are in love with and being a hypochondriac and I was not sure which side I was falling on, but with our track record I decided to call Elisa’s oncologist. Long story short, all the info was put together as well as all the heads of the doctors and they decided to postpone the gamma knife treatment and do the lumbar puncture first. All this takes time to arrange, and there are approvals and blood test to be done ahead of time. It also takes about 5 days to get the results back. That is a lot of nervous, stressful waiting. So what could we do to make it worse? How about have Elisa get a small tear in her Dura during the lumbar puncture that slowly leaks her spinal fluid. This fluid is keeping the brain suspended inside the skull. When the pressure is lowered you get an excruciating headache if you are in any position other than flat on your back. Yep that would make waiting worse. For 5 days Elisa was basically stuck to the mattress. It finally closed up by itself, just in time to go in and meet with the doctors and get the results. A quick side note about the results – this test gives a false negative 55% of the time. So the news that it was negative was welcome, but we were not over joyed. We thought that we would have to do another lumbar puncture, and after what Elisa had just been though, we were less than exuberant about the idea. Lucky the doctors felt that what they didn’t see -no cancer cells, but also no other abnormalities in the spinal fluid was good enough and they would just do an MRI of the spine and brain to make sure there were no tumors in the spine and then move on scheduling the gamma knife. So now we are up to last week. The scan was Wednesday. Thursday Elisa’s went in for her chemotherapy and we meet with the neurologist to go over the latest scans.
It starts with a death…
3) Is the Council Tax particularly high?
This from Gibbon (on Obedience):
In a follow-up report in 2010, the National Audit Office acknowledged that significant improvements had been achieved in acute stroke care, with more patients spending more time in specialist units, greater and faster use of brain scanning, and the number of patients receiving thrombolysis doubling between 2007–08 and 2008–09. It applauded improved public and professional awareness of the symptoms of stroke but noted less progress had been made in longer-term rehabilitation and care. A review by the Care Quality Commission last year pointed to failures including in access to therapy, psychological support, and help with returning to work and family life, as well as in post-hospital care reviews.
Jewelry - Vintage from grandma
These others extend beyond whites. Asian American school children in New York and Philadelphia have for years been beaten up by their black classmates. But people in the mainstream media who go ballistic if some kid says something unkind on the Internet about a homosexual classmate nevertheless hear no evil, see no evil and speak no evil when Asian American youngsters are beaten up by their black classmates.
Additional salt and pepper to taste
The pioneers called leaving the States for Oregon “jumping off.” Their jumping off points were typically Independence or St. Joseph, Missouri, where they left civilization as they knew it and headed into the unknown.
So yeah, I've been distracted lately.
5) Sales commissions. Any sales commission paid to realtors should be accompanied by a factura from the realtor. These are also deductible.
A native Bostonian gave me his recipe for baked beans shortly after I moved back to the city. It sat forgotten in my email in-box for years, and when I found it recently I lamented that I’d missed the wintry window of opportunity in which beans are so perfect. Then this cold snap hit and wham, I made beans. Since they take about 24 hours to prepare, some planning is needed, but it’s 98 percent hands off. I’d recommend soaking the beans during the day while you’re at work and then in the evening transferring them into a crock pot, bean pot or dutch oven and cooking them slowly overnight. Add a couple hotdogs, sausages or fish cakes and you’ve got a majorly great meal. Don’t want to wait until dinner? Serve with eggs, toast and bacon for a Boston take on a full English breakfast.
So, what do I have to say after mulling over my game versus Ivan?
This post represents one of my biggest coloring pushes: about four hours on-and-off, with the final couple of hours done nearly straight through. I'd wanted to finish the Frog tonight entirely, but I had to stop to let my hand rest. I will continue after I wake up: I want to finish this guy tomorrow, vines and all.
“Speedway,” she tapped the driver's shoulder and the carpet banked left and flew north, following the course of the White river until they veered away west. The majestic high rises of metropolitan Indianapolis shrunk over their left shoulders, but Speedway corner grew quietly and rose to a full crescendo in their sight. “Section C, anywhere in left central.” She wanted to walk a bit, maybe access some random towers and take meter readings of ion flow. The driver pulled up over the top of a public recreation center and Tina rolled off of the carpet into a catch funnel eight or nine meters below. She flashed her ident at the attendant as he gave her a hand up from the drop basin and he waved her off with a bow and smile. Tina beamed and both of their belts blinked with chasing blue plasms. So far so good, Tina thought as she stepped into a gravity well to the ground floor.
So come along to Mass in Blackfriars at 11am on Saturday 22nd, Sat of 2nd Week, for a Solemn Mass in the ancient Dominican Rite celebrated by the Dominicans. The procession starts from outside St Michael at the North Gate, the Saxon church in Cornmarket which stood next to the Bocardo Prison in the 16th Century, at 2pm. We will walk down Broad Street and Holywell Street singing the Litany of the Saints, the Te Deum, and English hymns, and back again to Blackfriars for Benediction.
While Jashi screwed her eyes tight shut and curled her chin to her chest, Pevan squinted into the rushing air, spinning the Gate with her mind, focussing on making sure it went exactly beneath them. The thought of failure never crossed her mind. Long practice had the Gateway open and waiting before they were half-way down.
6 good looking gentlemen, 6 distinct voices, A cappella music, talents on show, originality…seriously, what’s there not to love about this group. Finally, Take 6 are back! If you are like me who’s always loved pure genuine gospel music, then you would have been following Take 6 from the beginning. With their contemporary style, integrating jazz and R&B, these guys celebrate and share with us a work of art and a work of heart.
Aluminium Free Baking Powder – 1 Tsp
But there may be energies in our environment that can do the same thing, and these energies, in the places where the ghost lights appear, may be concentrated for some reason. This is all stuff that we’re just speculating on, but it does seem like the lights and the energy pertaining to the lights has very definite effects on the mechanisms of perception.
My good intentions have ground themselves (again) and I seem to do better when I have a task to complete or am doing something for someone else.
Everyone, back then, wanted out of this world
Chinese New Year is round the corner, this call for a time of family bonding. Not just my wife, Angel(daughter), Kenzo(my son) and me, but the greater family as a whole, my dad, mum, brother and sister with their kids.
There was no mistaking the hissed curse that whispered through the net of the Sherim to him. "I'll make a light. Watch for it going out."
COURSE: 343T; SPEED: 7.8
Back in the glory days when movies about the exploits of newspaper people were all the rage, it went without saying that you needed an editor. Great classic films are filled with bits featuring reporters and editors wrangling over assignments, yelling at, manipulating, and threatening each other – and later, commiserating over drinks. Producers needed the conflict that an editor-reporter relationship brought to the storyline; they needed an editor as a plot device. But those movies also reflected reality. Writers creating stories for mass consumption really did need someone to give them assignments, to vet their stories, and to make them work harder.
They came home a couple of times, they missed us! Apparently they like it there now - we haven't seen them in a couple of days.....
Hi everyone! Today I made a card for the sketch challenge on the Clean & Simple stamping blog found here. For this challenge we were to create a one layer card using the following sketch-
In his 'Canterbury Tale', Chaucer first used the name,
January 22,2006, World Social Forum Polycentric, Bamako,
When I first start researching someone new or just looking for clues on brick wall ancestors, I like to do a quick survey of the message boards and published family trees on rootsweb.com, ancestry.com and other genealogy websites. After all there is no reason for me to reinvent the wheel. If someone else has already done the research I don’t want to waste my time redoing it. But as anyone who has done a search like that can tell you the level of documentation is wide ranging. It’s up to the individual researcher to determine if the information is useful or even accurate. It was during one my searches for my brick wall ancestor Linsey Rhea that I really saw the clearest example of what my cousin and I call Hula Hoop Genealogy. We wrote up a short article about it and published it in a statewide genealogy society publication.
(even though I have a reeeally great spot for these particular pieces picked out in my new house...).
A limestone mine first dug in the eighteenth century. Deep, dark, wet and enormous (couldn't get a decent photograph of the interior as the camera's flash was somewhat inadequate). Bit spooky when we turned the torches off. Which we did a lot.
On Sunday, October 23, 2011 we had an outside broadcast at the Garden Village Primary School. The idea behind the OB was to promote the upcoming Village Day when Garden Village celebrates its 89th birthday. The weather was sunny, allowing the Villagers to set up their braai stands and tables to enjoy themselves.
Layer half the plantain slices, the fish, tomatoes, onion, remaining plantain in an adequately sized pot (about 8" in diameter worked fine for me). Lightly season each layer. Whisk together water, tomato paste, curry powder, and salt to taste. Pour over dish. Cover pot, bring to a boil over medium-high heat. Reduce heat to low and simmer for about 20-25 minutes. Slightly open lid for the last 5-10 minutes. (I served the dish with rice but bread or more traditional sides are other options.)
Required:
I do have something to share - Debs has done a fantastic tutorial on her blog on colouring clouds. Go check it out HERE.
NOTE: James S.A. Corey is the pen name for 2 authors, Daniel Abraham and Ty Franck. Ty is the assistant to George R. R. Martin. After reading Leviathan Wakes I am no longer worried about Martin finishing the Song of Ice and Fire because Franck and Abrahams seem to be more than capable of continuing it if circumstances were to come to that.
good times lasted for miles
As a potential employer looks at how you are dressed, how you hold your head, how you walk in, what confidence you show, if you look at them directly in the eyes and do you speak with a firm tone (the interview has begun).
Here are a few snippets, with the link to the full Antillean article at the end…
She taught me Turn, and Counter-turn, and Stand;
This commercial features the T-Mobile pink dress girl. I call her that because every commercial you see her in, she’s in a pink dress. Pink (magenta to be specific) being T-mobile’s signature color.
What is your biggest goal for 2011?
Solemn's blue eyes pierced through Ben like the knives they used in other towns.
Uggh!! Why oh why is my body so jacked up? I think somewhere deep inside, I thought that if I had a "normal" pregnancy that somehow my body would just snap into where it should be. HA! Not this ole body.
Local rivals Derby provide Forest fans with an example of what cost cutting looks like in the Championship and also demonstrate that it can be done. Having appointed Nigel Clough, Derby managed to reduce their wage bill by letting their experienced, highly paid players leave as their contracts expired. Importantly Clough also managed to keep them in the Championship whilst they reduced the wage bill and he is now able to begin building a new side on a cheaper, younger model.
Check for seasoning, add if required and take it off the flame.
Accessories - Stick Pins, Spellbinders Embossing Folder, SU Wild Wasabi Ribbon, Pearls, Grass Die from My Favorite Things
Cunning plan, I agree. But insofar reasonably sensible (Like anything so far made sense. – Ed.) as things go. Here is where it gets really scary though. I was working on a computer in college, a computer that had basically been on for several months with nothing significant happening to it whatsoever (Linux ftw!), but the moment I unloaded my computer (to check email etc. while the other computer was computing) and my phone (for no real reason) in front of it, and left it unmanned for about five minutes, it had hung. Massively, completely un-recoverably hung. And I blame my cellphone’s evil intentions. It saw an eventuality that it had not planned for, and it improvised. And it improvised really well.
Marcus: Cold. Because it is all swirling and swirling like this. (Shows me the swirling sky with his hands.)
I give special consideration to those whose efforts to spread the word about me and my books go beyond sensational. So, show your Octoberbest and leave your luv links in your post!
I made the Gingerbread boy with my tat lassies...tho only two were brave enough to try him..after I had explained all the pitfalls...and hopefully jumped over them!
Jagger Baird knows nothing about the Tribe when he’s hired as head of security for an archaeological dig on Mt. Sinai. The former Army Ranger is still reeling from an accident that claimed the life of his best friend, his arm, and his faith in God.
My rating of the movie is a 4 out of 5. You can check it out at your local video store or on Netflix Instant. If you try it, I’m very sure you’ll enjoy it as well.
We got caught off guard and so we all got split up, and I ended up finding some of my family members & former classmates & I followed them to a new location slightly outside of the city.
wonder if or how obvious it was that I was possibly the only straight
He is an alcoholic. That says it all.The court should force him into a rehab program to get him clean and sober. If he was sober he could earn money doing odd jobs in Holly Wood and Las Vegas. Putting him in jail won’t help anything.
As I write this, Boscoe is in the kitchen, sprawled across his orthopedic dog bed, which is topped with a fleece mat and surrounded by five pillows. The pillows make it sound luxurious, but they serve a purpose; they are tucked between the bed and the wall and keep him from slipping off the side and into the crack. If he does slip, he is stuck until one of us rescues him.
The third story is with Hannah the last remaining governess who owns the Academy. I liked Hannah’s character as she is still very much able to take care of herself but she remains in the past because of the hurt he endured and was part of.
Thank you for your patience and kindness.
The only other thing I have to say is that I'm so glad that 13 is an age you reach once, and only once, in your life.
She paints a lovely picture of working hard, but then having time "to read, do fancy work, play with our children and make their clothes in the latest fashion." She wants her daughters to be cultured. "...a cultured person must be a thinker and I am sure there is no other place or work which affords the chance for one to think than the farm does."
Three MONTHS!
Mindless hooliganism will end in the defeat of the EDL, not its victory. We should channel our aggression and rage in constructive ways. Ways which may well be long-term in nature but nevertheless successful in the long run.
Everything is collage, even genetics.
Raisin Cake
Dipping moon and drunk as a new dropped calf,
The researchers said this week they've found a chemical compound that spurs hair growth by blocking a stress-related hormone associated with hair loss -- at least in mice.
Austin, TX is a really awesome place I would love to show you around.
GARROSH: …Yep.
Aliens: Colonial Marines begins with an ostensibly abandoned ship, the U.S.S. Sulaco, recovered in orbit around LV-426. Players lead a group of highly-trained United States Colonial Marines as they board the deserted craft to uncover the fate of the crew. They will have to fight to survive unspeakable horrors and their own anxieties as they chase down the truth behind a galaxy-spanning deception that places humanity at the mercy of the most murderous and deadly species in the universe.
First thing I set out each Christmas
Indians have no answer to these questions of new emerging regional formations in South Asia. They vainly hope Pakistan would implode, but China has already shored up Pakistan. Indo-Pak parleys have shown that true politics is after all the end game of crass crackpots. This is the lesson which history teaches us.
1 eruptions
General tips
I forgot to take a picture of this part, too, but it was delicious!
with it’s frivolous liquidity, sans stability,
But what I feel is unfair is that they are pushing me to do things here and there. I should migrate, I should go somewhere else because nothing’s gonna happen to me if I stay here in the Philippines, or the fact that they are still treating me like a baby is too much for me. What’s worse is even my relatives, who think they know me well enough to tell what’s best for me, are also in on the pushing. It’s like they’re telling me that since I’ve graduated already, I can forget about all the values and principles that I learned with my Ateneo education. I’m sorry, but I just can’t do that.
This is actually my journal entry from last week for my Core 300 class. It’s a bit of a rant because I didn’t want to or more like I just couldn’t bring myself to do any of the exercises because of stuff I was going through at the time, which I will get into in the journal itself.
This book also presents the opportunity to talk about artic/tropical or warm/cold. We talked about things that were warm and cold. One day we drank a cup of hot chocolate, and the next day we went to get a scoop of ice-cream. If you wanted to add some ice-cream extensions, I have a couple of ice-cream activities that we did last summer available:
10. After the Gold Rush- Neil Young
I know this is just one step to the 1,000th person to follow my blog. I know this is the just one step to the 1 million LIKEs of one of posts. Got start somewhere right? I’m ready and loving this journey and I ain’t stopping. Moving along….one step at a time….
Just look... at this babyface!
yay! I had a finish this week!
Starring: Meat Loaf, Dana Patrick, Brett Cullen, and Xander Berkley
Returning to his seat, Self invites Russ to open the “little bag” he has with him, and Russ opens his rucksack and brings out his Punch puppet, as made by Bob Wade. Russ summarises Punch’s notorious dark character and murderous acts: “Percy Press once said to me ‘Punch is so old he can’t die,’” and then, with a slip of the tongue into Riddleyspeak, “‘he’s a law unto hisself.’ ... There’s something in him that doesn’t care about him, that he is simply the vehicle for. And I always remember the ‘broken seagull’ – do you want to read that bit?” The two try to find the passage in question but can’t locate it; a Google search brings up the reference on the Riddley Walker Annotations website: “they myndit me of gulls eyes. Eyes so fearce they cudnt even be sorry for the naminal they wer in”. Russ summarises the passage and Self comments that it echoes what Lorna says early on in the book about “something looking out through our eye-hoals”: Riddley’s people have a sense of an elemental force that is refracted back to them through the Punch story. Russ: “Riddley looks back in time to us as the people who made the 1Big1 – this thing is in us, but it didn’t care for us.”
Let’s start with the Riddler. This should be an easy warm-up before things start getting freaky. In this way we should hope to flawlessly recast Batman Forever for its eventual remake.
Ever feel like you are driving in circles? Passing the same scenery and desperately seeking the right exit ramp. God is forcing me to take the wheel. I just have to trust in Him that I know how to drive.
1. SEA SONG (5:34)
Cleaning a subway or fixing a window will not solve the problem. No one holding a gun says to himself, “I’m not going to go shoot this guy because they really cleaned up the neighborhood recently.” The broken windows theory seems to be a classic case of mistaking an effect for a cause. It does serve the purpose of providing easy, doable solutions to deep, intractable problems like unemployment and poverty, though. And for that reason, it makes sense that its popularity has been so durable.
Some of you may not know that I (Anna) am also a fine art painter. One of my paintings has become the cover art for this amazing book written by a very good friend of mine. The book is about a man searching for a path to enlightenment and his travels in Asia with a western born monk. Reading the book changed my life and I was over the moon to be given the opportunity to have my art on the cover. I am so excited about this for so many reasons!! *bounces around the room happily*
When it comes to security living in the sticks presents an even greater challenge – The SO may make it out there within a few hours if they haven’t all taken off to defend their own families (smart money is on that). And frankly as Mosby put it in his blog “you need those friends with shovels and lime”. These friends amigo are your neighbors. And the time to buddy up with them is last week, not next month. Git ‘er done.
Oh, and the menu sounds awesome. For $18, you get movie tickets and this (from the Alamo's website):
11. Around the World in a Hundred Years: Jean Fritz
It’s a personal comparison between faded images of the past and the bright colored ones of the present.I feel no need to apologize to anyone for my own mess.I feel no need to say I am sorry for a silent tear that fell on the keyboard.Anyhow the world is so silent right now I could scream and be heard to the end of the universe.I don’t write lyrics as I am awfull with words.I am better in silence.I can’t express my own feelings even if I am dieing to.
Upset over the “excessive handling charges” at the ICP, the traders today held a meeting under the banner of Confederation of International Chambers of Commerce and Industry (CICCI) and decided to halt the entire bilateral trade between India and Pakistan via Attari-Wagah land route from Friday onwards.
The unexpected will always happen. You need to know when your plan isn’t working, or at least KNOW when help is required and/or a change of plans is needed. The most common reason for students needing a change of plan is that they run out of time. The golden rule here is: simplify. Whatever your original plan was, make it easier, focus on the main points – 30 days… simplified action.
Thus, this girl could barely get out of bed and put on jeans and sweater. And this is what you get.
It’s one from my father-in-law: “Eat to live not live to eat.”
The daily routine started at six with the emptying of toilet chambers, during which prisoners would run down to a big pit under whipping from "commanders" (security guards).
High Total Lots: 29
I had been lusting over for many years.
Whew! That's it for today!
For instances, studies show that
The CEO agreed with Mr. Fun. He also called in the executive leadership of the agency and showed the idea to them. They all agreed with Mr. Fun that it was a great spot. Mr. Quiet was unmoved and fought tooth and nail against the spot.
This window was destined for the dump...it was in an old screen door that was in terrible shape...but the window itself? awesome...
“I was given the gift of a handicap to keep me in constant touch with my limitations. Satan’s angel did his best to get me down; what he in fact did was push me to my knees. No danger then of walking around high and mighty! At first I didn’t think of it as a gift, and begged God to remove it. Three times I did that, and then he told me: ‘My grace is enough; it’s all you need. My strength comes into its own in your weakness’. Once I heard that, I was glad to let it happen. I quit focusing on the handicap and began appreciating the gift. It was a case of Christ’s strength moving in on my weakness. Now I take limitations in stride, and with good cheer, these limitations that cut me down to size—abuse, accidents, opposition, bad breaks. I just let Christ take over! And so the weaker I get, the stronger I become.” – 2 Corinthians 12:7-10
“That is correct,” Wei replied.
- And what about the cleaner? What about him or her? That's the thing, ain't it? I mean I been fucked plenty and it ain't pleasant, so I made a vow to myself never to fuck anyone else....
More to the point, these kinds of people are typical of the elitist, snobbish buffoons who like to portray themselves as the pillars of society. They know in reality that their lifestyle requires the hard work and sacrifice of other, and even the shedding of blood in some instances. They just don't want to have to know about it in detail, and in fact, they have a visceral reaction to the very people their very lives depend on. They want to pretend that they are too civilized, above all that, while people who live the life of the Palins are to their way of thinking too common, too crude, to regard seriously as their equals, when the fact of the matter is, people like the Palins are their superiors in every way that matters.
he left. came back a few hours later wanting me back saying that next time we fight divorce cant come up. that we would work through our problems.
Heard this morning that for the twelfth year in succession peregrine falcons are nesting at the top of the tower of Chichester Cathedral. They are incubating four eggs.
Carmen is so desperate to win she takes anti-anxiety drugs to control performance nerves. But what started a year ago as an easy fix is now a hungry addiction. Her mother insists now is not the time to quit, but Carmen is sick of not feeling anything on stage and even more sick of doing what she’s told.
And, to add a little tone to proceedings, Rowan Gormley, co-founder of three Virgin brands with Richard Branson and now boss of the wildly successful naked Wines business, made a cameo appearance.
⁃ Notions: Just thread
I am late posting this month's swap!!! But I'm not going to let the month go by and skip a swap!!! This is a swap a month for a year.... I'm so excited about this swap!!! ((The Bird Swap got me a bit behind.. we had some issues getting all the birds to me but the birds are leaving the coop so we can have that swap behind us and pictures will be posted this weekend!!! It was amazing!! Totally worth the wait!!))
That and the debut of Jeff Goldblum as a potentially new-agey genius cop character.
To the right of the front door is a shoe cabinet to keep all that footwear at bay. I also can pop a laptop at a console table to create a workspace where I can still be near my family, or the kids can get cozy there to do their homework! It works just perfectly!
Learning must be insisted upon, enforced, and even coerced.
Its bottle list has also developed a keen following in recent times and the outdoor area and cider garden have been a ‘go-to’ destination for casual catch ups while the downstairs space has been the podium for beer launches and other special events. But the restaurant/grill upstairs has always been something of an undiscovered gem.
Here are just a few samples of some well-known voices you can get for your SatNav:
Please read the guidelines before completing the form and return the finished form to Abigail Lownsbrough no later than 9:00 am on 8 May 2012. You can email, post or deliver your application in person. Sheffield Volunteering will aim to respond to your application within one week to let you know if you have been successful.
Here's way too many pictures of us :)
Stamps - Purple Onion Designs
I re-set the camera on that log and took my chances once again.
Rule 71: A recognised football body, club, official, Team Official, other member of Team Staff, player or other person under the jurisdiction of the Scottish FA shall, at all times, act in the best interests of Association Football and shall not act in any manner which is improper.
Heather has a beautiful shop that she fills with wonderful vintage finds and handmade goods. She was kind enough to send me one of her white soap dispensers...and I love it.
Watches are useful items which we employ in our daily life. They can be large even to be hanged on the walls i.e. wall clocks or you can also use wrist watches which are usually placed on hands. Some people think that it is too difficult to find beautiful time pieces however, it is not true. You still can get desired watches very easily but how can you do that? Let us know this thing in the subsequent section.
And this is Monica's matching Gypsy Cozy. It will keep your Gypsy snuggly warm and scratch-free for years to come. :)
It was a night full on friends (old and new) and fun.
Takoma Park Safe Routes to School 5K Challenge
The Old Firm rivalry, as it’s known, is something which will forever continue to bemuse me in its pointlessness. Why are other teams’ fanbases apparently less ready to go for each others’ collective jugulars? I’ve never seen a knife fight break out between rally car anoraks, nor have I seen snooker fans jump to the play area (or whatever it’s called), grab a cue, and start bashing Ronnie O’Sullivan over the head just because he happened to be English. People I have to respect (or I respect out of choice) in everyday life degenerate to a group of wallowing three-year-olds when an Old Firm fixture is on the cards and even tonight have taken a few minutes out of their day to inform their Facebook friends that Neil Lennon deserved what he got.
Kim V. GOLDSMITH is the editor of Q&Art and administrator of Where is the Art (WITA). She is a multi-media artist currently exhibiting at the Coo-ee Heritage Centre at Gilgandra and has entered her fair share of art prizes over the past 10 years.
Grilled chicken breasts, broccoli, salad, fresh bread
(If you want the next installment, you'll have to look at the webcam yourself).
Jocelyne Loewen ... Carol
I so want to have Him perform for me all the works and it just seemed like this week was an awesome week of getting lots done.(this was also a super busy ministry week). Some of you may not know that I struggle with fibromylgia and there are days that nothing seems to get accomplished. I want to rest just as much in knowing that that's the work he is accomplishing in me during that time too- to just rest which is so hard for me.
The young DJ with the diverse taste soon caught the ears and eyes of various socialites and New York celebrities, including fashion designer Tommy Hilfiger, who featured Ronson along with other sons and daughters of celebrities in a 1997 fashion campaign. A year later, hip-hop mogul Sean "P. Diddy" Combs hired Ronson to DJ his fabled 29th birthday bash. These and other high-profile gigs boosted Ronson's "hip quotient" and helped promote his more serious-minded music career. Fusing his eclectic turntable skills with his knowledge of musical instruments and songwriting, Ronson eventually embarked on his first solo project. Featuring such diverse guest artists as dancehall rapper Sean Paul, hip-hop artist Mos Def, Jack White of the White Stripes, and Rivers Cuomo of Weezer, Ronson's debut album, Here Comes the Fuzz, bowed for Elektra in 2003.
8:00-9:00 PM Gossip Girl (season finale)
and boys in funny outfits who get together every
October is a time of year like none other if you enjoy being scared out of your wits. But what happens in October doesn’t have to stay in October. Halloween is the best of all holidays, and there’s no reason you can’t celebrate year-round. This book can help. Happy Halloween!
Now that I think about it...a crocheted ripple throw in blue and white ~ in an ikat pattern ~ would be so bluetiful!
Coherence keeps me happy. Coherence stops me from screaming like a bag lady at a passing subway train. Beyond that, what keeps me in the theater is having a single, unbroken shot skipping from Black Widow fucking up some dudes, to Captain America fucking up some dudes, to Hawkeye impaling some dudes (thereby fucking them up), to Iron Man flying around and fucking up some flying dudes, to Thor using electricity to fuck up some electrified dudes, to the Hulk fucking up everybody. I was leaping about in my seat like a two year old that had just spotted that last Tickle-Me Elmo and I was going to HAVE IT, no matter who I had to kill. This is synergy of such epic proportions that even God must have crossed his legs once or twice. And that dude is old. He has to use some kind of deity-strength Viagra these days. Why do you think we haven’t had any divinely impregnated virgins recently? Performance issues.
“For you maybe, are you so eager to be a grandmother? You don’t even look like one.” I try that angle to get her to back down. “Besides, I don’t even remotely like any of them half as much as I would need to… to…”
Fair Trade
1 clean
If there’s one thing I learned from practicing estate planning in Southwest Florida, it’s the importance of client communication. It is (or should be) well known among attorneys that the perennial number one complaint clients have about them is lack of communication. Polls and complaints to state bar and legal watchdog organizations routinely show that nothing bothers clients more not being kept informed of the progress of their case and not having their phone calls or e-mails returned. Laypersons or inexperienced attorneys are sometimes surprised to learn that malpractice and the mishandling of client funds take a back seat to mere silence in the hierarchy of grievances. But it makes sense. For lawyers, each case is one of dozens to be juggled and prioritized simultaneously, but for ordinary folks, legal actions are intense little bundles of hope, fear, or anger. Trusting your case to a lawyer and then waiting in the dark to hear what it happening is like dropping a sick child off at the hospital and then not being told whether or not she’s getting better or worse.
Jaxon was Baptized!
I used two different Tibetans in the movie. The first one, with the red merino/firestar yarn, was crafted by The Spanish Peacock. The second, smaller Tibetan Lite was crafted by Grizzly Mountain Arts. Weight is not a big factor with Tibetans, so I never bothered to put them on a scale. The Spanish Peacock spindle is 13" from stem to stern. The Tibetan Lite is only 10". Both are perfectly balanced and a delight to both the eye and the hand.
This is the usual routine for nights like these. She helps take his mind off the previous events. Usually she starts with a cheesy joke to break the ever growing silence as he drives. Then goes on to talk about something, anything, but the fight. Eventually he loosens up and they talk for hours, parked in some random parking lot, the local park, or anywhere but home. They tell of past days as kids, present times in school or with other friends, and dream about the future. In the talking and joking and laughing the fighting is put to the back of both their minds and they head back. Arriving home when all the lights are out, not a sound is heard, and everyone is deep in sleep. They part their ways with a simple “goodnight” and “see you tomorrow” just like always.
I could share with you my prayer that my ex-husband would be less bitter and more forgiving towards me.
Yes really. FOOD.
Supposed to make you feel like a big man and cure all yer ills but these capsules really contain super bug diseases among other things. Who cares?
Recall Willis’ proposal for the genre of Ps. 2, which includes (1) a “…threat of impending conflict…(vv. 1-3), (2) …affirmations of certainty by the speaker that he (and his comrades) will prevail (vv. 4, 6, 8-9); and (3) warnings to the enemy that they will be defeated if they do not surrender…”[25] It is not difficult to imagine why the New Testament authors returned to the ideas of procreation and individual sonship found in Ps. 2; nor is it difficult to understand how they applied the text to Jesus’ resurrection from the dead. His victory over death was not only a prime example of triumph in the midst of turmoil, but also the point at which Yahweh conferred upon him universal dominion (i.e. Sonship). There is a message here that rings true even still today. We might look around and see the nations conspiring and plotting in vain while kings of the earth set themselves against Yahweh and his anointed. The Psalmist assures us that he who sits in the heavens laughs because he has poured out his king on Zion and said to him, “You are my son; today I have begotten you.”
We are also going to purge the house again (although it’s not as bad as it was last time when I removed over 5,000 pounds of unwanted clutter from the household). Goodwill – be prepared for weekly drop offs.
There is a lack of physical security for journalists, he said, referring to those who have been killed, disappeared and incarcerated.
Love and happiness will be around,
I read A Golden Age as part of Shannon’s Around the World in 12 Books Challenge – it’s not something I’d have normally picked up and read but I’m glad I did because it’s always nice to learn new things, even through the world of fiction. Most of this book is set around 1970-1971-ish when Bangladesh was known as East Pakistan, a provincial state of Pakistan. They provided a lot of the goods for that country, but received precious little in funding for schooling, hospitals, etc and the growing discontent among the population came to a head after the 1970 national elections in the then-East Pakistan. The landslide victory of Sheikh Mujibur Rahman caused uproar in Pakistan where it was demanded he form a coalition government. He refused and declared independence on 26th March 1971, naming the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh. Pakistan retaliated by invading to subdue the guerrilla forces, but after the nine-month struggle, Rahman was named prime minister of the new Bangladesh. Many people fled to the sympathetic India during the war, who also provided some military support.
“They try that on me all the time,” the wolf crowed in triumph. “Now let’s get the rest of them. You go around the house that way, and I’ll take the side you hid on.”
and also the beasts of the field,
I can't give you anything
Okay maybe I'm being a tad anal here, after all The Small Faces were pretty much one hit wonders here in the States ("Itchycoo Park") and since obviously the folks at the Rock & Roll Hall of Fame are complete fucktwits (oh b.t.w they've also nominated The Red Hot Chili Peppers as well, just to give you an idea of which orfice they've been keeping their heads in when they're not using them for you know, thinking). Okay so both bands shared the same bassist, keyboardist and drummer, but that's about it. Steve Marriott lead vocals and lead guitar and Rod Stewart lead vocals and Ron Wood lead guitar, BIG difference. Two different sounds. You can draw comparisons this way, below is a Small Faces video and then a Faces video:
Re-built from its core to be lightening fast and responsive, Lightroom 3 adds power throughout the application to provide a fluid experience for photographers. Images load almost instantaneously, and the import experience has been redesigned to be more intuitive, with added previews and default selections that give users quick access to sort through and find images. Helping streamline and adapt to photographers’ changing workflows, Lightroom 3 now allows users to import and manage DSLR video files, as well as take advantage of tethered shooting for select Nikon and Canon cameras.
There is probably nothing more sure and clear than the title of this post. “Sin in the Church”. To ask, “Is there sin in our churches?” is a very unnecessary question. Where there is a church without sin; it is of their own confession; and not the truth. Besides where there is people there will be sin. By that statement I do not mean to lessen the gravity and seriousness of sin in the church.
and? he's a little boy.
2. Make a new theme related project every other week. We are broken up into teams so that each team only posts twice a month. Teams will be determined once the members are chosen. Cards must be loaded into the folder by 12 noon EST the day before the challenge goes live.
Gal 5:13,15 (Phi) It is to freedom you have been called, my brothers. Only be careful that freedom does not become mere opportunity for your lower nature. You should be free to serve each other in love… But if freedom means merely that you are free to attack and tear each other to pieces, be careful that between you, you destroy your fellowship altogether!
Which is why I seethe for her when someone asks, "why did you marry him?" She was asked to look within herself to find out where she went wrong.
For the writers, illustrators and authors amongst you, I wish for you representation, publishing contracts and book deals, excellent sales, awards and… an abundance of creative outpouring!
If I looked back over my blog posts, I think I'd be unsurprised to find that many of them are a whinge of some kind. It's so easy to fall into that trap, perhaps, knowing that there are sympathetic souls who are fellow writers reading them, but it's probably not a good mind-set to have as default!
I was SO happy that The Arts Decoratifs was open today on a bank holiday:) I was so busy yesterday and had no idea that today was a national holiday in France...!!! ohlalala. Marc Jacobs and his exhibit at this wonderful place was one of my main reasons to come to Paris... so Merci to France!!
3. What is you most guilty pleasure?
How do you print these babies? On paper. Haha. Actually, any paper you like will do (well, not computer paper!) but I recommend mailing labels. Weatherproof ones are much more durable, so go for those. You can also just print on a thick cardstock and use as is, or laminate for extra durability (post to come!)!
Prologue: Ord Mantell – Republic Start Planet – Level 1-10 (Trooper / Smuggler)
The English language is a bit like the Edinburgh Fringe. No-one actually organises the over-all thing, anyone can join in and it becomes all the more vibrant for it.
Vince greeted us, and even remembered my name from last night, and as I said, they seem to pride themselves on this which I think is awesome. I ordered a glass of Cabernet again, the the boys were drinking beers. One thing I did notice was that they have Shiner Bock in bottles which is a bonus as I love this beer. Regardless, it was a wine night for me.
inspired by the simple things in life! I hope you enjoyed visiting with
we’ve never drilled before but we’re world class
Sure, okay.
Lilly: Myra's nothing. She's less than nothing.
Eight 'Revisiting WoW' posts
I've made a tradition out of hand-delivering the manuscripts of the Breweries books to my editor, Kyle Weaver, at Stackpole Books in Mechanicsburg, Penn., starting with the first edition of Pennsylvania Breweries. This one, as Kyle pointed out, marked 10 years that we've been working together. So after I dropped off the chunk of paper, and told him a few stories about putting the book together, we went out to lunch at the Pizza Grille in Camp Hill I had a Tröegs Pale Ale -- actually, we both did; Kyle's onto good beer now too, and always seeks out the locals when he travels -- and a really different mushroom pizza, with smoked mozzarella, and a wild mushroom puree instead of the traditional tomato sauce. Delicious, and the beer was great.
For I see your wayward flinch
Always Stay Graceful,
My card today is a kiddie card for Vineet's colleague's twin kids (a boy and a girl) who are turning 1 this week. I went overboard with stickers , but with a small logic (that might not sound too logical to you LOL!) - little toddlers can't read but they can identify pictures ;-).
3-28-10
CCCW: I know that you have a very close relationship with your Head Coach Marc Fiore. Can you tell me how you two met?
Apple Valley 10k - 10/24/09 - 58:38
Kate - Gifts For People Who Love History
The rules are really easy:
‘My little sister died.”
In high school, a preppy friend gave me my first nickname: JW. That morphed to J Dubs and eventually Dubs, which had its advantages during basketball games – shouting it on fast breaks was easy.
She must have made these before I was born. I don't remember her doing embroidery except to teach me. Her crocheting at that time was sweaters, afghans, hats and scarfs for the family. This one has some spots that I will have to look up on how to properly treat them.
Lack of access to appropriate opportunities is an issue of power, (Melkote and Steeves, 2001). For Rappaport (1987), effective social change processes mean that researchers and practitioners have to address problems of unequal power relations. According to Wilkins (2001: 1), ‘to reshape the field of development communication we must situate its discourse and practice within the context of power’. Melkote and Steeves (2001: 36) argue that empowerment cannot be understood without first defining power, since real change may not be possible unless we address power inequalities between marginalised individuals and groups at the grassroots and those who make policy decisions. Craig and Mayo contend that political power in capitalist societies cannot be separated from economic power. Further to this, White (2004: 14) points out that “the effect of the poor communities to pull themselves up would encompass a redefinition not only of the political system but also economic, social and cultural practices that might engender a democratic ordering for society as a whole”. Community empowerment can therefore lead to social movements that may challenge existing political power structures.
PS. I also think I managed to transfer my Google connect Followers to the new site, please let me know if this is working properly for you as I update the new site. Thanks so much!
In the middle, the beautiful, peaked, luscious results of the recipe in the most recent edition of Mastering the Art of French Cooking by Julia Child, Louisette Bertholle and Simone Beck. I doubt the original edition recommends using a food processor over a blender (which I followed because my blender gave up, possibly a casualty of the current Mercury retrograde), but there’s no way I’d hand-whip this recipe. It combines an egg and two yolks with two cups of oil, added at such a slow trickle that my hand hurt from pouring and the food processor squealing its own objections. The first cup alone took longer than 15 minutes; the total blending came in at closer to 35-40. But oh the taste and texture. When time allows, this is the recipe I will invoke.
Barn Owl…
release from Sri Lanka’s incarceration
Luckily I have the movies to turn to when I need to escape. Most of the few friends I had have gone since my life started turning bad, but also because I have been really poor in terms of maintaining my friendships. Deep down I am still not allowing myself to be happy for who I am and what I have. That must be it, or maybe it isn’t. Perhaps it don’t even matter what it is as long as there is something to blame for every misfortune that happens to find me.
This statement might be a little over exaggerated but I was pissed.
My mother-in-law Sandi has always been an amazing seamstress. When she retired, she took up quilting as a new hobby. She became an awesome quilter surprisingly fast, and her beautiful quilts really changed my impression of quilts and quilting. She has a great sense of color and contrast, and made me realize that quilts could be traditional or modern, classic or trendy, or anything else you can dream up! We've been the lucky recipient of many a beautiful gifted quilt over the past few years (you might remember the Christmas quilt shown in this post). I still need to get proper photos of the new one on our bed, but I thought I'd share photos of another recent quilt she made.
Get rid of Top Of The Pops because of 24 hour music channels? Missing the point - I don't want to watch 24 hour music channels to see what's in the top 20, I want a review show. On that reasoning, the BBC would have got rid of the 9 o'clock News, because there's 24 hour rolling news. 'But people want a round-up', they bleat. Exactly, idiots, so give me a pop round up, and make it entertaining. Also, give me an entertaining weather review/forecast, and make that amusing as well. I pay you for this shit.
I see the day when darkness recedes
I will come back to this as the programme develops, but I wanted to make sure that the dates go in your diaries as early as possible.
When we all perform together as a somewhat motley crew, we seem like a freakish American family Von Trapp. We really do. But we trudge forward, the squeaks and squawks coming from the recorders, the twangy strums mostly out-of-tune.
I embossed the image with black and painted it
Me. - I'll pay them to care!!
That dark deep thoroughfare, had Nature lodged
Long live PlayStation 3!
Anyone get any good stuff?
We’re all born to broken people on their most honest day of living
brother and sister anymore,
HUNTINGTON: It’s a bummer when we don’t get to shoot together, very often.
Issued by Ronnie Mamoepa at 082-990-4853
and that for good - upon my soul.
“We are RYV, expect us to break the silence, whether in the streets or on the Internet,” it said, stressing that “silence is a crime.”
Mothers who have gone before me understand and mothers who have yet to go through this stage do not look forward to it. 2012 is the year my first child will be graduating from high school and I will be learning to let go a little bit more. There are a plethora of books on raising toddlers and there are books that guide you into your empty nest stage of life, but what about the stage where you are asked to release one child a little bit more and let God takeover. My children were dedicated in church as infants, made the decision to follow Christ at various ages and I know God loves them even more than I do. But while growing up they still needed me to guide them, educate them, and love them when they were hurt or disappointed. That need is waning and what has amazed me is the amount of sadness I have felt this year as I learn to let go of my first child.
Vanya stepped off the ladder of the Medved lander. Pushing off the ground, he made a few light hops across the Moon’s surface that belied his large stature. Joining Kostya, Vanya looked out of the rocky, crater pocked landscape.
Okay. Go! Any questions?
A proper job to occupy their days.
The junco flock from this last winter brought a bird of a different color. It was so different that I wasn't sure at first that she (?he?) was a junco at all. Rather than charcoal and ivory, this bird resembled a toasted marshmallow.
I found these little plastic raisers for painting furniture at Ace Hardware recently. I thought they were a pretty genius, but simple, idea. They just lift whatever you're painting slightly off the ground (or whatever your surface is) so that you don't get the sticking that you do when you paint pieces laying on the floor or a dropcloth. Also, the point of the triangle makes a minimal mark, so you can go ahead and turn your piece over and paint it pretty quickly and you just have a teensy little dot to touch up later (if you want). This was the first time I'd tried them, and they were great!
- ava woke up this morning and when she didn't see emerie right away she started asking, "emmm?" until she saw emerie - then she started squealing and yelling, "emmm!". it pretty much made my day - what a great way to start your morning!
The first thing that I realized about the blogging process is that it’s not as easy as it seemed. Format, visual style, rhetoric, voice, and audience all matter, and matter to an extreme degree. Suddenly my writing audience grew from a single professor or at most a classroom of peers to anybody with access to the internet. I was given the opportunity, in a way, to decide who my audience should be, who I wanted to talk to about the television which I wanted to discuss.
That, too, was my ambition, and I got so far as to walk to Everest base camp—twice. The Khumbu Valley is, I think, the most beautiful place in the world, but, alas, I’m too old to go clambering about on the mountains.
The disaster was greeted with worldwide shock and outrage at the huge loss of life and the regulatory and operational failures that had led to it. Public inquiries in Britain and the United States led tomajor improvements in maritime safety. One of their most important legacies was the establishment in 1914 of the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), which still governs maritime safety today. Many of the survivors lost all of their money and possessions and were left destitute; many families, particularly those of crew members from Southampton, lost their primary bread-winners. They were helped by an outpouring of public sympathy and charitable donations. Some of the male survivors, notably the White Star Line’s chairman, J. Bruce Ismay, were accused of cowardice for leaving the ship while women and children were still on board, and they faced social ostracism.
Wait long enough and your writing seems someone else’s. Sometimes I think of walking among the abandoned hulls and fragments and gathering enough for a golem of parts, a Frankenstein’s monster of my life.
LES MISERABLES directed by Claude Lelouch
I am in awe of those of you that can put into words so eloquently what you are thinking...making us all laugh, cry, think, and ponder. It is such a gift. My friend Mrs. Bee has this gift. It's amazing. You feel so normal when reading her stories, like she could be your next door neighbor or your best friend. Not only does she inspire us with some real, serious stuff...but in the same breath she will mention all the things that make her life so imperfectly wonderful...poking fun at herself, bathroom humor, family tidbits, messes, and crazy food adventures...all the things that so easily connect us all as Moms. And again, over at Snapshots, Morgan shares her heart so eloquently. She has such a gift for connecting her heart stirring moments to scripture and creating a beautiful learning moment...not only for herself, but also her readers. I feel so connected with her as a Mom, as the love for her kids is so evident. And for kicks and giggles, she throws in awesome parenting experiences and yummy recipes. Great blog to keep up with. The gift of writing is so powerful. It can turn a negative into a positive and turn a struggle into a hopeful journey. I applaud these women and am so thankful to have connected with them. What a blessing.
Ok, I doubt I will get a script typewriter for my birthday but I bet I can count on lots of great mail!
I'll have my computer gear there, and I'll be announcing specific feature demos of Photoshop 5 throughout the day. I'll also have my PictureMate Deluxe and Canon XTi digital camera in case you want a picture of yourself and friends to scrap while you are there! Cost per picture is 25 cents! We are also planning a Photoshop Elements 5 retreat, so if you are interested, let me know. Drop me an email at vickiconquest@fixthatpicture.com or give me a call at 417.350.4569. We don't have a date set yet as we would like to gauge interest first, but probably after the first of the year.
LET THE SKY FALL
don’t know
Live Oak Pilz
The next day, when she’d unwrapped the cage and hugged me and said through the smiles that it was the best present she’d ever had, the questions started.
To get back at Carlos for stealing her client, Gaby redecorates Carlos’s shabby office with all kinds of fancy furnishings to make Doris thinking her money isn’t going to the addicts. Doris is furious and leaves. Carlos can’t make Gaby understand that he only wanted the money for the center, Gaby is convinced he just wanted to win because he’s a shark and he always will be. Carlos is not too happy with that assessment of his character.
3-1/2 cups vegetable broth
“Special interests like the Colorado Bankers Association won’t be able to come back and change it in future years,” Fowler told Westword. “This is going to affect the bottom line of the lawyers and the bankers, and we know that and don’t take this lightly. We believe that the foreclosure crisis is the biggest issue our national economy is facing.”
My years of legal experience in law firms was client focused. I learned to be polite, responsive, and helpful to all clients, and never lost sight of the importance of deadlines. Who was my client now that I found myself working for a company that may have been my client at a firm? After all, I think that paralegals are most successful when they have a client/customer service mentality. I quickly realized that I have many “clients.” My boss is a client. I want to be indispensable to him, take care of those things that I was hired to manage, and also learn to evaluate legal matters and the level of response required. Each attorney or government agency that sends my department a subpoena is a client too. I am usually the first ambassador for the company that they communicate with, so I am quick to be helpful, knowledgeable, and leave a lasting good impression. As I mentioned earlier, we engage local counsel to handle matters in the jurisdiction where they are admitted to practice. They need me to provide them with as much information as quickly as possible to meet court deadlines, and provide their legal opinion. So, a good relationship with local counsel that trusts me increases the likelihood of the company’s success.
Photo: HiroC-sā and OnoD-sā: Objective Accomplished!
The lionization of Dick Clark since his death has fascinated me in that, while the guy was indeed a part of all of our childhoods, he wasn’t a particularly “warm” media personality. Oh sure, his Top 40 DJ voice was mellow and very pleasant to listen to, and he had the cleancut good looks of any era’s boy next door. But Dick Clark was a host and nothing more. Like Ryan Seacrest today, he was an anodyne presence who had no show-biz persona to speak of — he ushered kids onto a studio set to dance to records and he ushered
The next morning I found her in the bathroom sobbing. I didn’t have to be told why she was crying and I went to my knees as she sat on the toilet lid and promised that I’d never do it again (although secretly I was thinking that next time would be different – I just wouldn’t get so drunk). And I meant it – I truly did. It was a promise I made over and over again for many years.
I purchased my 1st batch of Lily of the Valley stamps this last week or so also that I cant wait to play with after I get them and some other new girls and some Easter stamps.
"Should I advertise my balls?"
Start a Team: If you choose to mentor others to become Stylists, you can dramatically increase your earnings in addition to earning commission on the jewelry you sell. You not only earn commission from your team’s wholesales sales, but you can earn residual income from the people they mentor, too. Because the more we support one another, the more successful we all become.
“Light & Luminous,” In India Minal the dance instructor desperately wants to win the contest, but upsets her students as she acts the diva instead of the mentoring teacher.
We had some sugar cane juice at the pagoda and just sat in the shade for a while. Then we went back on the bikes and went to this some restaurant. I don’t know the name of the thing we had. There were two cooking pots on our table and the waitress brought out a bunch of 5″ long living fish and dumped them into the soup. I was king of weary of trying it at first, but it was actually really good. The only problem I had was it is extremely had to get the meet off of fish using only chop sticks. I’m definitely not a pro at using chop sticks.
Granulated sugar tops the cake
9. Everyday you spend in Office, you are driving the world closer to the brink of war and destruction.
That's right; these are not ninjas in Zombie Vs Ninja. All that we have here are a bunch of pajama-clad clods jumping about, swinging their weapons and throwing their smoke bombs in the woods. Nope, even the guys that have "NINJA" written across their heads aren't ninjas. Not even a little bit - I'M more of a ninja than these guys!
Now she has gruesome nightmares every night—reliving the horrific crime that she witnessed. The man in black, all the blood and screams and that metallic wrong smell…. She can’t tell anyone what really happened that night because what she did is almost as bad as what she witnessed.
What have y'all been up to?
This email arrived from a would be suitor today…
This weekend, we are grilling ribs again. If I can find good apples, I just might bake my first fall pie of the season. Then again, I'm just not 100% ready to let go of summer stone fruits. My part of California has a different micro-climate. If we're lucky, our blue skies and temps in the 70's have been known to arrive in September-October. We shall see!
Since Latin plays a large role in TLS (how awesome is that book? SO GOOD, if you have not read, you are totally missing out) I'm going to ask you to put on that brain cap and write a sentence in Latin (can be from TLS too,) leave it in the comments (with translation please) and a couple of my pals Brenda Drake and C.A. Marshall over at DNA writers are going to judge! So get those Latin Dictionaries/Google Translator's ready and get creative.
The anomalous numbers make black search-and-destroy operations much more likely. If genocide was afoot, it was certainly not the sort of genocide that black activists and leaders such as Nation of Islam leader, Min. Louis Farrakhan, have claimed.
The individual “paperweights” were created with iPerbolic (photographs of individual crocheted motifs); the rest of it was done in Photoshop. Background texture is done with Quadtiles font from The Dingbatcave (my dingbat font site).
But I found it kind of sad.
Spring 2012
And please, feel free to add to the list of scam agents you are more than happy to warn others about.
Under the pressure of being a new manager, it can feel like you don’t have time to coach poor performers or to further develop your best team members. If you want to be a successful manager, you can’t afford not to raise your entire team’s performance.
And so I read.
So, what is happening? Well, the Malay/Muslim community is once again being consolidated and united around Umno. Inevitably, this will have tremendous long-term repercussions for the community and indeed the country.
So that's how my weekend went from Army duty to sex shop!
That was always his example to me to show how much he loved his pickled herring in cream sauce.
Fishfaggish – A scolding, foul-mouthed woman.
We were doing music therapy tonight. We work him out while he sits there and listens. This time my mom had him, and she was clapping his hands together. She let go, and he just kept going. Once I had the camera on him though, he got cold feet and couldn't perform. I am just super excited and had to share!
And stuff,
"And Now Your Even Older"
I was amused, and repeated it to Kirby as I drove him to work. Kirby said "OH, Joe--Nobody even invited him! He just showed up. He's ALWAYS bored."
The band and the orchestra played well off each other, with the orchestra creating a wall of sound – particularly effective during the surreal experience of seeing classical musicians play Dearg Doom.
Mr. NC and I had a wonderful weekend with the grandchildren. All three visited on Friday and on Friday night we took them to see Mary Poppins at the Bass Performance Hall. It was a delightful play. This is our performance hall in downtown Fort Worth.
■Cost: $160 w/Free shipping (save $25.75)
The Chief gets on the radio and the cop tells him that he's stopped a limo doing 105mph.
I also come from a different school of thought. Doggie dirt and germs are not going to kill a kid unless of course they have some sort of condition or allergies…. But I am just an Auntie, not a mom. What the hell do I know about raising a child? Absolutely nothing.
Process in making bread:
recession was
18. If you ever decide to live today like it was the last day of your life, tomorrow would be hell after all the crazy-ass shit you pulled today!
The women’s movement is also considering the avenues of seeking audience with the respective judicial officers including the chief justice to ensure that justice is delivered.
They conclude that most viewers actually prefer to see ads with kids or animals.
Overall, I’d say our special teams haven’t performed as well as we would have liked. While Brandon Boykin and Branden Smith have both made tremendous contributions, we also gave up a punt return for a touchdown (albeit due to a bit of trickeration) as well as a fake punt for a touchdown against Sakerlina. We’ve also gotten away with couple of mental lapses during the fielding of punts. But, hey, that’s why we have practice.
Monday the 7th: It’s fun to raid friend’s closets, but can you imagine how fun it would be to read Fashion Television’s Jeanne Beker’s? You can, and for a good cause to boot. Jeanne Beker and Friends Open their Hearts & Closets for Gilda’s Club at Gilda’s Club from 6-8pm. Then, later in the evening, Cream of Comedy takes place at Second City.
Postcard from: Tallinn, Estonia.
That's going to be played my way
I feel semi accomplished for already having completed a load of laundry and having one of those showers where you scrub all your skin, wash your hair and pay attention to everything a little more than you do in your regular shower.
Interested in Andean spindles? I couldn't find a website for Kaye, but she had some for purchase in class. The Spinning Loft may also have some.
12:00 - Lunch time: peanut butter and jelly sandwiches, cantaloupe, pretzels
Show and Tell Friday @ My Romantic Home
in a past we all must enter.
It all started very early Saturday morning when I caught my middle girl, in the small hours, waking her younger sister sleeping in the bunk below.
Busy, a new feeling, even if it was only for one day. The weekend was the busiest for weeks, handy because now I might nearly make enough to pay a few bills.
saraban13
Also, I finally finished something I've been wanting to get to for a while - a hairbow holder for the little girl. She is finally getting some length on her hair so I wanted the bows to be out so I'll remember to use them. I bought the O plain and painted it green to match her room and bought the jungle animals ribbon, which did not photograph well , to go with. (Note: I have since moved this to her room and it is against yellow paint there and I think it looks better - I'll have to take another pic soon!)
While the original settlers had come mainly from the Netherlands and Friesland, their numbers had been swelled by French and German religious refugees, and by then they had integrated, to become Afrikaners. The full details of the gradual but steadily mounting fermentation of dissatisfaction among the Afrikaners under British rule are too many and varied to included here, but there was, for example, the disadvantage of not being provided an interpreter, if and when they were required to appear in court.
Well here is the evidence of this tactic being used in Bersih 3.0 and this is coming out from the horse’s mouth itself. Zaharin – Setiausaha UMNO Bandar tun razak .
Ø But: Negates any words that are stated before it.
Paper and cardstock - Dovecraft and Hobbycraft
This past weekend I went to the north yorkshire coast of the UK and I walked along the beach enjoying the ozone and the sound of crashing waves just as I did as a child. It was really gratifying to see, in these days of computer games and mobile phones, children doing exactly the same as I did when I was their age. Running into the cold surf, splashing and laughing whilst their parents warn them of the dangers and to be careful.
Motorola mobile phones will be uncomplicated to handle and are typically lighting and straightforward to hold close to. The fashionable in addition to amazing variations now have manufactured him or her favorite among the teens exactly who desire to bring plus flaunt cool and trendy mobile phones accessible sold in the market.
Panizzi was energetic, hard-working, enthusiastic, and a really good hater. He knew he was right, and everyone else was wrong, from the idiots at the Royal Society who didn’t know enough Latin to catalogue their own library, and then wouldn’t pay him when he put it right for them, to the greedy and narrow-minded publishers who were reluctant to hand over the copies of new books to which the museum was entitled. He was in a state of almost constant warfare with his own colleagues at the museum, and his various advances in the hierarchy were vigorously resisted – a good starting point was usually his foreignness, though in fact he became a naturalised Briton in 1832 (which caused a breach with his fellow exile Mazzini). Interestingly, a number of the Museum’s staff since its foundation had been foreigners, including the Dutch Mathieu Maty, the Swiss Joseph Planta, the German Carl König, and the Swedish Daniel Solander (Banks’s friend, colleague and librarian), and none of these had chosen naturalisation. These precedents did not of course prevent meetings at which speakers expressed concern that Panizzi had been seen selling white mice on the streets of London; Fagan acidly notes that ‘had it been a few years later, possibly the distinctive title of organ-grinder would have been added’.
Hearing the words "head for the mountains" brings back awkward college memories of swilling cheap Busch beer in college back in the 80's. Thankfully in our more enlightened times, heading for California's Sierra Mountains won't lead you to a skunky brew, but the fine beers of Mammoth Brewing.
in Roeselare, West Flanders have been busy.
In other news, another of our neighbors got a puppy. Faith no longer is the youngest in the neighborhood, and she seems to love him too! His name is Moe, a mix of basset hound and what we suspect to be dachshund. With the addition of Moe, Faith is now surrounded by Male dogs; Our other next door neighbor has a beagle named Freckles (seen below), and our neighbor in back has a large dog (don't recall the race...) named Yoshi. We've mused a big puppy party with the neighbors but a few problems come up with that. Freckles isn't neutered (and seems unlikely to be) and we don't want him humping her, so unless he gets fixed, they will only play with each other between the fence.
Row 11: 2 sc in first sc, sc in next 4 sc, 2 sc in last sc, ch 1, turn (8).
I will be asking for $150 million of the government's $32+ billion annual funding starting now. I hope everyone else will also!
Founders Backwoods Bastard
A chance to remind you of what you’re fighting for
It was a case of buyer beware.
Only a quarter of the original community came back to live at Putfontein, which had excellent irrigation and boreholes. Now nothing is happening at Putfontein, just subsistence farming and squatting. Some parts of the farm are being hired out to white farmers because the claimants cannot farm. They steal from their neighbours – cattle and grain - which they sell because they cannot make a living on the farm.. There is no electricity, no fencing, and the boreholes are not working. The original Putfontein farm was highly successful, cultivating mealies and peanuts. There was an excellent beef herd with a dairy, plus successful sheep farming. One of the farmers said he spent a lifetime and thousands of rands nourishing the soil on his farm, On his particular 372 ha farm (there were seven farms on the original Putfontein), only six people are now living. The rest stayed in their old homes.
Already Cigarette firms are rallying together to create a campaign to defend their right to brand their products and indvidualise marketing from competitors.
Finally, everyone, regardless of their hearing ability, should practice common sense behaviors such as dressing well, researching the company, and rehearsing interview responses. By putting these tips into practice, you’ll have a better chance of landing that dream job. If you would like more information on how you can save money on hearing care procedures then visit American Health Advantage and sign up for a hearing care plan.
To this add: 2 cups of Rice Krispies and 2 cups salted and roasted peanuts.
After reading the terrible news about the same-sex marriage ban in North Carolina, I was deflated and saddened that religion can't seem to stay out of our politics. It left me frustrated. So when I heard the news today that Obama has finally come forward and has shown his support for marriage equality, I was jumping for joy. Literally. Some say it's just a political move, but I don't believe it. It would have been safer for him not to endorse gay marriage, especially with an election coming up. So Bravo, Mr. President!
It’s horrible.
and guilt in heart
I am writing this blog with the thought that it may never see the "publish" button or maybe it will! I am torn on this issue but feel the need to empty out my brain before it explodes...and here is why!
And the last one, I just turned my head every 10 seconds. If you look closely you can see my ear right under my eye.
Perhaps my lifetime’s last melodrama
The colors are going to range from light pastels to bright and shocking neon colors.
Three of us sleep on mattresses lying on the floor, drift asleep to Mac Davis twanging softly.
So we get to the concert (late, as usual) and we walk in the back and I can see Harry on the big screen and I can hear him singing and I get all jumpy and clappy and start yelling things like "Harrrrry!" and "Wooooo hoooo!" and "It's okay, I'm here now!!" while Captain Carl drags me to our row.
The great thing about this project, is that you probably already have everything on hand. I dug through my fabric stash and grabbed any pink or red fabric that I could find. What makes this even more special, is that some of the fabric I used is from Lily's great grandmother.
“Why guard a door to a dead end corridor?” he thought.
(Ur-Biere de Neuve: Warm Conditioned, Barrel Aged Sour)
And then I walked away. I never touch them, I leave them alone, to do their soaking and whatever else they want to do when I am not looking! I watched a movie, chatted with my brother about computer problems, and then remembered my poor skeins!
Reading will change your life!
And be dead and gone
It is clear that the wild popularity of such a blog would rapidly lead, through inexorable physical forces, to my domination of the world's economic, political, technological, militaristic, and whatever-else-you-can-think-of systems.
Which was nowhere near 300 bucks! In fact, mine came in at 1/10 the cost- 30 dollars!! Shewee- that sure is sweet! This is one of those projects that I just wanted to see IF I could do it, ya know? I feel pretty good about its new home, too. It's hard to decorate with vaulted ceilings; hard to find items the right scale.
And finally, the Water Nymph (or “Narf”) named Story. And the weary, plodding apartment caretaker.
How to track through GPS location?
PCC: “Is it possible to keep running on the treadmill even though you’re pretty sure you died 9 minutes ago?”
There is a large part of me that feels like perhaps it’s because we live in a society where divorce is an easy choice and divorce attorney’s are posting billboards that say, “Life is short. Get a divorce.” and websites like “Ashley Madison” are promoting extra marital affairs and swingers clubs are growing in popularity. I suppose I could see how wearing a wedding ring would be an inconvenience to those life choices but fortunately there are still good men out there like my husband who wear their wedding rings because they are proud to be married, proud of their wife, proud of their commitment and who aren’t looking to play around on the side. Lord knows my husband would have no problem picking up another woman if he wanted to but I love knowing that he doesn’t want to and would never betray me like that.
Slice the dragon fruit down the middle and scoop out all the nice flesh, with a spoon. It’s very soft, so this is easy. Chop the fruit into small chunks and puree in a food processor, or blender, till smooth. Dissolve the sugar into the lemon juice and water, by heating it in a saucepan over medium, or in the microwave. Once it’s cooled down, stir it into the dragon fruit puree and refrigerate for about an hour. Then pour the mixture in your ice cream maker and follow your manufacturers directions. Transfer to a bowl, and cover closely with plastic wrap. Freeze till ready to serve. Since it’s mostly fruit juice and water, it may harden quite a bit. Remove from the freezer and allow to sit and soften a few minutes before scooping, or zap it for a couple seconds in the microwave!
So here is a recipe that I've made on Monday night, simple dessert for hubby and baby before they eat dinner. This is based on the ingredients that I had that day. Basically you can use any fruits that can be complemented with yogurt. Mine, I have strawbery and mango which i put in layers. Example, arrange 1st layer with mango then yogurt, later strawberry and yogurt again. Lastly I sprinkle the granola on top. Or else you can layer it in the middle as well. Taste??...They like it very much!...Cam hubby ni suke healthy stuff so got compliment from him la. hehehe
As we face this year and the years ahead, we have this confidence in the God who is the same yesterday, today and forever.
I've worn it long for about the last ten years, so this was Substantial Change.
~Janelle
This park has many different kinds of animals that the children can interact with. It states in the brochure that you can “Visit our barn filled with friendly domestic animals such as llamas, pigs and donkeys. You can even feed the goats.”
2. You don’t care about the majority of Americans.
Thank you for reading,
"Exactly," he said, giving me a grin as my eyes lit up with understanding.
I declare right now by the power of God’s Spirit that I’m reigning in life-in my health, finances, job, and in every area of my life. The glory of God is manifested in me and I walk in the victory and dominion of Christ today. I manifest success, glory and excellence, by the power of The Holy Spirit. Amen!
In cold weather, don't ride with tight-fitting boots, shoes or gloves. When the driver asks you to get off and walk, do so without grumbling, he won't request it unless absolutely necessary. If the team runs away - sit still and take your chances. If you jump, nine out of ten times you will get hurt.
Like the film ties every thing up – there’s no loose ends – I’ll add my point rating of three point five so there’s no loose ends here either. I’ll call it worth seeing but kind of disappointing.
I do love those Clearly Inspired Challenges .... don't you?? I mean, great inspiration AND the chance to win?? :) Awesome. Love it.
The adoptee (for sake of argument I’m talking about newborn adoption) might be hurt by both sets of parents. Even in an open adoption how does a child come to terms with parent not raising them, especially if there are more children after they were born. The child might feel hurt and betrayed by both sets of parents. The adoptee might never understand why they were placed and why they could not be kept with their original families. And then you bring on top of that sealed records, falsified birth certificates. It would be a struggle for anyone to manage this “triad” with all the mixed emotions.
I see tonight…
The only time I've ever smoked in my life was a couple of joints on two occasions in the same house. This Swedish? Danish? Norwegian? actor went to Cuba and he and I struck up a good, short, but solid friendship. He threw two parties in a row and every single person there was someone I trusted. Still, the weed did nothing to me, so I haven't touched it since.
It may be time for a clutter intervention.
What followed was a rearranging of everything I knew. On one level, I call the injury “karma fast forward”, where I was challenged to let go of that which no longer served and had to learn to absolutely trust a higher power for everything. When you realize that you may never walk again, may never even do the simplest things that we take for granted, your ego crashes and dies while something else is born. For me, what was being born was whatever that whale wanted me to become. It was all about the whale.
And then wham! it's 2 days before palm sunday and i finally pull up the instructions for the garden and read that the wheat berries should be planted at least by palm sunday. So, i load up my 4 kids, (1 still in their pjs) and head to walmart to find some dirt. The rest was so easy and the kids have loved watering it each day. Today, we read the crucifixion story, made a stick cross, put a playmobile jesus inside the tomb and covered it with a large rock. Anyway, i guess i'm learning that its better to do something than to just quit if i can't get it together to do everything.
Mr. G. Kingsworth that has helped us some this winter is not expected to live.
The cake is AMAZING the next day, and even better the day after as the cake become super moist and fudgey as it soaks up all the jam. Serious yums..So if you bake it today, it will be perfect for Sunday afternoon tea.
He pootled along in his swingle
Considering BAM’s longevity, stature, and influence, the book also proves to be a history of the international performing arts scene.
Roast chicken is one of those kitchen basics that I've never been able to master. Mine is usually passable, but often dry and flavorless. So Dorie's version, Roast Chicken for Les Paresseux- lazy people- was my choice this week for French Fridays with Dorie. The recipe was incredibly easy, and I'd have to say that it's as perfect for busy people as it is for lazy ones.
The top searches for my site end up being:
Now, on the surface, the idea of a Coaches Registry I believe is a good one. As a matter of fact I thought that the lead organization of the sport in this country was already collecting this data on our coaches. I think that would be a tremendous aid in working towards the “30 medal goal” in major championships. Such a collection of data would be very useful in trying to match up athletes on the brink of success with coaches that possibly might be able to help them get “over the hump”. Especially in areas where we have been absent from the medal stand for some time.
This is where you make the customer feel obligated by giving them something extra. In real life the dinner invitation is a good example. Only sociopaths don't feel the need to reciprocate a pleasant dinner invitation. In fact, the rule of reciprocation is so strong that it can lead to a lifetime pattern of tit-for-tat dinners with people that you eventually come to classify as friends.
The words at the beginning of the post were spoken by an elderly gentleman about halfway through the TED video below. He articulates my thoughts so much better than I ever will. He speaks around the middle of the video. Best I shut up and hand over to him, I think. I’ll just stand aside and applaud.
Last year I decided it was all in time and I planted an entire 8'x4' bed of them. Mixing in some ever-bearing with a few shoots from my smaller beds and with this warm Winter we had the plants continued to grow all Winter and are now busting out of the raised beds and colonizing the pathway in between, intent on making the entire raised garden area into one big strawberry empire.
Any customer who has bought two or more of my tutorials (valued at $5.95 each or higher) this year (I know there are a ton of you) is eligible to receive the Elegant Holiday Bouquet Tutorial entirely FREE! All you have to do is fire me off an email before Dec16th. Important: Be sure to give the name and email address which was attached to the PayPal account you used to make the purchases. Please include which tutorials you have purchased. That's it! I will send it off to you within 72 hours. It's just my of saying thank you and showing you how versatile those tutorials you bought are!
I used pipe insulation to fill the gap between the dowel and stand.
I had nothing in the way of face food to prepare today without getting extremely creative. So no faces. Just food...Maia's lunch: leftover kale meatyball baked ziti; orange pieces; Tofurky lettuce rolls; mini pumpkin muffin; carrots; stuffed green olives; cucumber slices.
Speaking of the Wall, the first Pink Floyd album where Waters wrote all the lyrics, one new observation I made of his choice lyric pattern became apparent while hearing “Mother” from that album, “Brain Damage” from Dark Side of the Moon, “Wish You Were Here” from the album of the same name and “If” from Atom Heart Mother (maybe others?). He changes the number of syllables per line every so often and ever so slightly in an odd but still rhythmic pattern that bolsters the impact of his words, which are often very self-reflexive, tortured and existential. It clearly makes him the stand out lyricist of the band.
To them
The best thing you can ever do is to look at yourself in the mirror and say “I love you”, because if you can’t love yourself you can’t really love anyone.
Martin Methodist is an NAIA member that competes in the TranSouth Athletic Conference.
Min 5: “I don’t think I should’ve capitalized Mom in that last minute thought. PEOPLE KNOW MY GRAMMAR IS TOILET LEVEL. THEY CAN FEEL IT and that’s why they’re not reading this post. Mom? Mom, help! That’s when you capitalize Mom when it’s used like a name, jackass.”
“Least those layabouts are here for us.”
Are touched by all the radiance
After the previous three nights, it was not a surprise to hear heavy rain start to pound the roof of the tent well before midnight. This time, however, it did not stop in the early hours of the morning. Stay tuned to see if we got washed away .... coming up in the next installment of our Fraser Island camping adventure.
David said in Psalm 23 v 5 David said thou prepare a table before me in the presence of my enemy, I assure every one of you listening to me tonight, whether the enemies like it or not, it shall be well with you.
Three-Twelve reached out and lightly caressed her cheek like a lover, her voice as soothing to match.
Collecting Free Stuff
Check out this stat right on the bottle....
If you want to leave your footprints on the moon, you must return to God, the Potter and ask Him to show you what destiny He had in mind when He was creating you. Submit to His shaping and moulding. Allow Him to fire you up.
5 1/2 c. cinnamon toast crunch cereal
There’s getting to be more distance between towns as I head West. It’s important to stop for water at every gas station, even if you aren’t out, and to get out early, giving yourself more leeway before dark.
Once upon a time there was a bloke. He lived in a green and pleasant land and time marched on slowly as he found his way in the world. The bloke grew up and found a girl. They were soon married. Then they had a couple of kids. Suddenly life began to move at a faster pace. Work hours were longer and quality time shorter. Life’s little simple pleasures were fewer and more fleeting.
I don't know now which of us suggested the holiday - neither of us had any money and it was just another one of those things I should really have known better than to do. But when you've taken so much time and trouble to mess up almost everything, the idea of running away is very beguiling, so we looked on the Teletext listings anyway. And as we scrolled through screen after screen of bargain-priced offers for a week in the sun, the idea took hold. I'd never been on a holiday with a girl friend before, and we didn't even know each other very well, but a quick phone call to a bored-sounding holiday operator, a reckless charge to my credit card, and without even knowing where we'd be staying, we were booked for a week in the Canary Islands.
1) If you want to participate in this, just email me at onefineblessing (at) yahoo (dot) com and I will add you to the mailing list.
(gets out acceptance speech, approaches podium)
Shut Up and Drive. That was the phrase that got the ball rolling (see my post called Shutting Up and Driving). Well, today I confirmed my first cake order. Yes, an official order. I'm gonna get paid to make a cake! Granted it's an order from a relative BUT it is going to be her gift to a friend's son. So technically it's a cake for someone NOT related to me. Yaay!!
If you like salt with your margarita, salt glasses as follows: on a small plate or saucer, pour a bit of Rose’s or fresh lime juice, enough to just cover the bottom of the plate. You can also run a small slice of fresh lime along the rim of the glass to dampen it. Cover the bottom of another small plate with Kosher salt. Dip the rim of the glass in the lime juice, then in the salt to cover the rim. Pour in your margarita and enjoy!
As soon as I saw that Ready Player one was about game geeks with strong links to the 1980's I was all over it and from start to finish I couldn't put it down. It's fantastic. I don't know if it's because the 80's are my era and games are in my blood and but I suspect it would be just as epic a read for anyone who doesn't share my history. It's just fantastic. The story telling is spot on and there are so many twists and turns that it's hard to put down.
Like his brother from another mother, William Shatner, did last week, Mr. Nimoy turns 81 years old today, and he’s still running like the Energizer Bunny shot-gunning Red Bull.
With news of Edward’s secret engagement, his mother disinherits him. Lucy leaves Edward and decides to marry his brother, Robert. Edward apologizes to Elinor and both decide to marry. After Marianne overcomes her illness, she begins to become infatuated with Colonel Brandon and both decide to marry as well. Willoughby is left alone with regret. All is well and the Mrs. Dashwood and Margaret have a happy life as well with their married sisters.
Here is the blurb from the Press’s website:
The Spirit Level Delusion is a masterful book, written in a calm fashion which is both informative and wide-ranging, whilst also being very entertaining.
I am set free, God has set me free!
It’s now about 6:30pm, and Holly and Reggie are about to record the first link of the show (which obviously won’t be live) where they introduce the coaches who sing A Beautiful Day by U2. They all sing it live which is very impressive actually. There’s a big screen at the front of the stage, quite high up, but it has all the lines on it, scrolling up with each persons name on it as it comes to their line. The song ends and we all show our appreciation. We’re then told they have to do it again. So the version that went out at the top of the show was actually the second attempt.
Bill Hybels talked about how we need to me immovable, we need to stand firm and let nothing move us from what we know is right. "We have to stay mentally tough and hold onto our core values." He said "we should always give our best. No matter what always abound in the work of the Lord, everyday."
Oven: Preheat oven to 350° F. Arrange frozen chicken breast fritters in a single layer on an ungreased baking sheet. Bake, uncovered, for 25-30 minutes until no pink remains or an internal temperature of 165° F as measured by use of a food thermometer placed in the thickest part of the chicken breast fritter.
So have you been touched by the Angel yet?
Anywho, here is one of the critters from the book, who is only in it for a handful of pages, but he is visually interesting and wholly worthy of a rendition, I think. Here he is-
8. “I want your boots, your clothes and your motorcycle” (Terminator 2)
What's your opinions on NOPI nail polish bottles?
Our little girl can now hear horns honking, dogs barking and more importantly, her mommy and daddy's voices. I've been talking and singing to her all along, but now I know she can hear us. She has also been given a special little nickname. I'm sure you've heard of the Cookie Monster, well this little lady has officially earned the name Kicky Monster. She kicks so much throughout the day! I have to say that I do love it because it lets me know that she is okay.
The Muppet Movie?
French aerobics class was a myth buster. I learned that some French women do workout, contrary to common belief. But, as my Girl Scout cookie test proved, they can eat a nibble of something and then stop. So maybe French women don’t need to workout as much as Americans because they have restraint when it comes to delicious treats. That is a generalization, of course. Either way, aerobics class was well worth the money.
- Peeled Pink Lady Apple
I have always loved this stamp by Tim Holtz...It worked really well for an Ageless Timeless Beauty Magnet! I only used Broken China, Tumbled Glass, Spiced Marmalade, Wild Honey and Peeled Paint, Shabby Shutters and Tea Dye,
is Food & Drink.
I guess I have rambled enough. Point is, I think I like my no technology downtimes these days & appreciate what life has to offer! I am learning not to be glued to this machine, not thinking of doing away with it; but just trying to hit the balance! I hope that A does grow in a society where technology is embraced without giving up basic human interactions.
To be clear, I started listening to Marty In The Morning long before this move was mooted. His mother, I now know, lives a few doors down from our new home. There can be no doubt that we have been drawn together like this by the Fates. Before now, I assumed that this fatal artistry would lead to a progression from nodding acquaintance through casual conversation to the eventual destination of a unspoken yet deep spiritual bond, which I thought I had already begun to express itself in coded mellow morning messages. But it now appears that our destiny is one of a different hue. He looked up as I approached the gate. Our eyes met. For a brief moment we held a gaze that spoke sparingly of a love that might have been, soured now, to an enmity from which we cannot flee.
The one design rule I’ll never break is that homes should look like the people who live in them. So I would want RuPaul’s boudoir to look campy (if that’s who he is in his private life, otherwise we’d just have one campy room for his public alter ego); Snoop Dogg’s doggy pound to be so, so Snoopy; and Diahann Carroll’s lair to look very grand dame.
Socks, Annmarie’s own
I love Abraham Lincoln.
Ladies and Gents I bring you
On top of it all, two teachers on my team retired after 20+ years at the same school in the same grade. I moved into one of their old rooms and sifted through ALL of their great stuff (and let's face it, some not so great stuff after all those years of teaching).
Love Me by The Phantom
Clifford Crane recommends people looking for unmatched drag time visibility to use Apollo Vision over the complex or their buildings. The system uses live video feeds to display events in high definition video, and refreshes at a rate of 120 femmes speed and the best thing about these high-resolution cameras designed and manufactured by Clifford Crane’s company Apollo security system is that they use full PTZ functionality. This really means that they can plan, tilt, zoom, and easily focus on any object in their field of view. Its full administrative capabilities are valued easily at local and remote stations, granting security managers the ability to observe and see the security of the area from any location.
Here's what the photos looked like on the visitor's table. Note a few more white candlesticks and one more tissue flower arrangement. It was fun watching everyone come in that morning and check out Lori and Lynn's work!
Cain’s reaction to God’s rejection was much worse than any writer who thought he had the perfect novel. The youth took his anger out on his brother and killed him. That’s like one of us killing a successful novelist because our book was rejected.
We had a 9 AM appointment at Allegheny. Colleges do their best to make prospective students feel wanted, and Allegheny had a TV monitor in the admissions office that scrolled through the names of all the high-schoolers who were visiting that day, including my son:
It’s not the size of their clothing!
Does it? I wouldn’t know. I was in a relationship so didn’t go out dating.
U.S. hospitals are ripping out wall-mounted toilets and replacing them with floor models to better support obese patients. The Federal Transit Administration wants buses to be tested for the impact of heavier riders on steering and braking. Cars are burning nearly a billion gallons of gasoline more a year than if passengers weighed what they did in 1960.
And I'd also like to highlight some of the BEST recipes I've made so far. This is the cream of the crop, folks. The recipes that I can't wait to make again and again. The ones that are already a part of our regular rotation. The ones that are so delicious, light and simple, I would be inhumanely evil and greedy if I didn't try to push them into your recipe boxes.
Yesterday, when I caught her wiping her nose on her shirt:
to Kilauea
A Scor-Buddy( I LOVE LOVE MINE)
Mr. Poole will be speaking at the Temecula Library on August 21st. Here is the information regarding the event. If you are interested in the local Temecula water and how the larger scope of our water affects you, I encourage you to check it out.
There are a couple of spots taken up by athletes that didn’t medal recently due to injury or other mishaps, but who otherwise are clearly in medal position. There are also a couple of spots where I did not place athletes based on age and I am waiting to see if they can bypass Father Time and continue at their recent levels.
Kate got sick. :( Throwing up, diarrhea kind of sick. It's really sad. Nana had to deal with some of it while K and I were in away at the wedding and I felt bad for all parties involved.
R5-13- sc in each
“Then, what is feasible?” Well, it’s sort of wait-and-see.
I'm feeling tipsy now. All I managed to write was flowery smell coming off a low head. It's also orange and cloudy. And like the last one, musty and bready. It's pretty hoppy but with no bite. I wrote 3 stars but I'm not counting that one either.
Wow! That is a pretty big challenge. There is a reason it is called “the shadow”. It can be a bit scary to take an honest look at what we are feeling and why. Isn’t it easier to sit in judgment and blame someone else than to take 100% responsibility for our own thoughts and actions? Ya, I think so too! But I have realized in recent days, months, years that I need to take 100% accountability for everything that happened or continues to happen in my life. Whether it’s the abuse I endured as a child, the issues in my marriage, or what I perceive to be happening within the roller derby league I was practicing with. This book reiterates what I already believe and that is that “thoughts are things” and we create our own world based on our thoughts. When I think, “Well they don’t like me and are ignoring me and leaving me out because they don’t like me” then it sets that “wish” into motion and sure enough I get more of what I perceived to be true. This just shows me that I am feeling separate from others….separate from my self…separate from God/Love. Where there is separation, there is fear. Where there is fear, there is the shadow. Where there is shadow, there is dis-ease, pain, sadness.
i know that you (ms.winner) have recently given up eating bread and sugar.
To be concluded.
- 75 g sour cream
Anyhow, if anybody who happens to be reading this post wants to learn how to use apostrophes properly there are sites which can help. Here are a few :-
Examples:
The entrepreneurial culture that was instilled early on at ESPN is present throughout. The company still takes risks, still suffers when the on-air talent act inappropriately without comprehending how their actions can cause a stir, and still seems like a place where youthful vigor can pay off if presented at the right moment. Take Mark Shapiro, the whiz-kid producer who scored the top job for the “100 Years of Sports” project at age 26, by responding to an offer for the number-two job by saying “What do you mean, number two?” Seems that “moxie” is a requirement for working at ESPN.
I'm going to run the garbage down, pick up a dog nail trimmer and toilet seat. My hubs will take a daughter to a movie marathon at the theater today and I'll get some laundry done and hopefully finish my M.O.G dress today. This weekend went way too fast and I didn't get any sewing done rather than a longing look. The bedroom switcheroo was too intense and my sewing area was high traffic...
Yeah, okay, as revelations go it's not exactly Earth-shattering, but still.
They hand-selected about 22 of us to bring out to their headquarters, meet each other, show us around the World of Coke, learn more about their live positively philosophy and how to better build my own brand.
“Herr Tusch is a lager brewer of great repute whose cleanliness and quality is of the highest order, with barrels filled and delivered fresh within the astounding radius of ten blocks from his business address.”
and uses the two together, is such use capable of amounting to use of the graphic device mark for the purposes of Article 15 of Regulation 40/94? If yes, how is the question of use of the graphic mark to be assessed?
Bisognano: And to them, I’d say that’s precisely why hypertension’s been nicknamed “the silent killer.” Most people with high blood pressure feel fine, even great, most of the time. But that doesn’t mean active damage isn’t occurring.
I tend to find lots of creative inspiration everywhere!
From exploring, imploring, from candidly aging
Lucas Matthysse recently fought Zab Judah on an ESPN card and showed that he is no fighter that should be taken lightly. He's knocked out Vivian Harris, dropped Zab Judah on his way to a controversial split decision loss, and recently knocked out once highly ranked light welterweight & welterweight, Demarcus Corley. Zab Judah has gone on record saying Matthysse is the most powerful punch he has ever faced and he believes Alexander is making a big mistake by taking the fight with him.
‘Heartache and Fear’ takes a step back midway, and returns to the initial, darker, feel with ‘Suffer Me Suffer You’. A rockier song, it starts off with some epic drumming and also contains the emotional lyrics that are present throughout the album. With lyrics such as ‘Here she comes again, stepping on my heart since I don’t know when’ the band really shows their song writing ability.
Not many people can say that.
North Antrim Magistrates Court heard how a man purchased a Hyndman’s malt loaf from a supermarket in the Ballymoney area before Christmas 2007.
A general noticed one of his soldiers behaving oddly. The soldier would pick up any piece of paper he found, frown and say, "That's not it," and put it down again. This went on for some time, until the general arranged to have the soldier psychologically tested.
We had Easter brunch at the hotel the previous weekend and had been invited to return for the Grille 39 experience. We dined at the restaurant on a Friday evening, around 7 p.m., and I wasn’t surprised to see many open tables due to it being a hotel restaurant. However, once you are seated you may even forget you were in a hotel lobby. The decor is rich in colors: burnt orange, dark yet brilliant blues. The seating was comfortable as we were sat near the fire for the evening. We were quickly seated and met by our server who was pleasant and informative throughout the evening. She explained the weekly specials and a few of her favorites after we placed our drink orders. With a smile, she delivered our drinks and we relaxed with images of a delicious meal in our heads.
- Paraben and formaldehyde free
I just read an article the other day from the Washington Post about student loans and how they plague this country all the way into retirement. According to the brief piece, Americans 60 years and older still owe over $36 billion dollars in student loans. Americans collectively owe over $870 billion in student loans, “significantly outpacing credit card debt or auto loans.”
Sheik Yousuf Al-Qaradhawi: Allah Imposed Hitler upon the Jews to Punish Them – “Allah Willing, the Next Time Will Be at the Hand of the Believers”
Tailwater Soft Hackles and Hare’s Ears are worthy droppers whether you are fishing dry or wet.. Speaking of dry flies it was pretty cool to find some pockets of dry fly feeders, largely brown trout, and some of fine size in certain corners on the White.
LRH never talked about the necessity for huge, fancy buildings. Quite the opposite. He stressed that Orgs should make do with what they have, and build it up, and purchase larger quarters when they could afford them. He merely insisted that quarters be clean and functional.
When he did that I had a feeling he was going to propose.
I did let the higher ups know about this, but nothing was done. “Maybe it was misunderstood – English is not their first language” was the best I got out of it. I did not feel bad at all when my husband (then partner) suggested a change of pace and a move to Massachusetts that I gave less than 2 weeks notice. Had I been a bit less “flight – run hide turtle!”, I probably would have handled it differently. However, we know from previous posts, that my first reaction to bad is “RUN!!!!” That is what happened.
I'm going to attempt to update this blog Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays.
Sorry for the confusion.
“Threats” by Amelia Gray
10. Our Anniversary: I saved the best for last. Ryan and I will celebrate our third wedding anniversary at the end of May. It’s been such a fun ride so far, and I can’t wait to see what other adventures life has planned for us next.
Lee’s coaching knowledge and philosophy is also influenced from his brothers as a child. Lee said he copied how his brothers dressed, wore their hats, and a lot of their actions on the field. He said he learned a lot by playing summer pickup games with his middle brother, Terry, during summers.
Banana Walnut Muffins
On this Easter weekend, I have memories of standing outside Mamaw’s house, in front of whatever shrub was in full bloom, dressed in my best suit and tight, shiny black shoes, getting my picture made with mean sisters, bossy cousins, and everyone else in the family. So many pictures I couldn’t see after the flashes were finished. But glad to be finished with the pretty part of Easter, we were able to tear off our ties, change our shoes, shed coats and sometimes shirts, and get busy hiding and finding eggs all over the yard, stopping only long enough to eat jelly beans and chocolate bunny ears. Wearing black beads and needing naps, we made the long journey home complete with baskets of cracked, colored eggs we would keep for weeks in our treasure troves. Just a word of advice, don’t eat those things after the third day. Take my word on that.
Welcome to blogging, Jack: see you at The Session.
“Symptoms include extreme suspiciousness, conspiracy-mongering, delusional thought patterns, staunch “us against them” mentality, withdrawal from reality, and often religious fanaticism.”
Who best can drink his cup of woe,
As for my relative, he has to want to change as much as we all want him to. We're all here, waiting with open arms to support him, but I'm trying to get him to understand that zero tolerance, as painful as it will be, is where he has to start.
One can well imagine that some form of punishment may have also been implemented if anyone contravened the rules. “We saw footprints inside the observation tower this morning. Which one of you DO NOT understand the rules of this tribe?”
There is a time to occupy your head and body with reality. As well there is a moment to wonder in the splendor of your beautiful spirit. Next month I will be going on yet another adventure with Pam and the mermaids in the desert.
Jemima Jones Beck
all in Chinese.i can't read Chinese too even though i am a Chinese,because
If Stanley Armour, Madelyn and Stanley Ann Dunham were deep cover CIA agents involved in the early development stages of secret projects for MK ULTRA/ Cyborg-Mind Control Programs at HU with Psychologist Dr. William Thetford (Fantasy Perceptions in Children Studies),[71] then Obama’s admitted bizarre childhood mentor, Frank Marshall Davis, cannot simply be dismissed as his “real father” or a “KGB handler.”
I love photos of people that show personality. And there's lots of personality in this one - all that gel, that awesome top, the pasty paunch with belly diamond and tattoo, and the fag. (I'm not a smoker, don't endorse smoking, etc., etc, but cigarettes do something for me in photographs.) This is not a picture of Sasha and Michael. I don't know who it is, but I love it - just seedy enough.
Why not try keeping the significator off to one side, somewhere where it can be kept in view throughout the reading, and then see how that card 'relates' to the other cards in the spread?
Donald's holy head, my graciousness butt-crack sandwich.
renting a Forest Fields house owned by landlord, Mr Shakil. When they
Jam 5:15,16 And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise Him up. And if he has committed sins, they shall be forgiven him. Confess your faults one to one another, and pray for one another, that you may be healed. The effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous man avails much.
Thank you all for the great cards that you made for the last challenge. Unfortunately not everybody followed the sketch. So we were forced to remove a few links from InLinkz. And we will do that in the future, but without letting you know before, as we did this time. And please link our blog in your post, in a way that others can find this blog too ;o) So please read the rules carefully. It would be a pitty if your card could not be in the prizedraw.
I have to admit that this situation appeals to my sense of the absurd, only not to my wallet, or my deeper sensibilities. The media puff around new authors does inject a little harmless sunshine into the lives of people who think “I could write a book”, briefly imagine doing so and becoming rich, then turn the page. But it’s not harmless to everyone. When Leo Hunter is old enough to understand about vanity publishing, he’s going to be an early entrant into a large company of very disappointed people.
I’ve been wearing glasses ever since I could remember. Way back when I was rocking the Voltron set and having little nerd-rage-gasms over how the Black Ranger had such lame Zords (the Red Ranger had a T-REX, Black Ranger had an ELEPHANT?). Having specs for most of my life, I have encompassed one of if not all of these roles at a time, whether they were accurate or not.
I’m convinced that Pensacola is the world’s smallest town. Seriously. I just saw two people (a new couple that’s blossomed from a rather pathetic break-up) walk past my office window. There’s no way they saw me or knew that I could see them, but I now know that they are a couple and I didn’t know that… until a couple of seconds ago.
This was taken last year in Autumn. Last year’s Autumn was odd, b/c we had a hard freeze early in the season. This caused a lot of trees that aren’t quite temperate to this climate that were still green to lose ALL of the leaves.
I found this vintage Sarah Coventry necklace at a yard sale for $1.00. I loved the shape of the pendant but the gold tone was wearing off. It was hard to capture in photos, but it looked really worn out, in the way only cheap jewellery can. Not pretty.
Remember me?
I will be teaching my class on Tuesday night!
We, living in a country changed by force and condemned for opposing it ,nationalists like me realise that a violent revolution as espoused by some, is not the preferred option, how indeed can we support such a course, that will surely lead to the death of the innocent and the break-up of our country and indeed Europe. Yet having some intellect we realise that Europe is on course for bloodshed, that history dictates that disparate peoples simply cannot live together whilst one offends the other. This stance is far, far from racism, far from simply hating for hatreds sake, people such as I harbour no secret desire to take over the world, we have no plans for camps, wholesale slaughter or tyranny. Yet for nationalists like me, we fight for our very right to exist, to, it is hoped, prevent conflict and to adhere to natures plan, rather than impose against the will of the people, an agenda, it would seem that the BNP, for all their good, travel another road.
This chili bean sauce (this brand is the one I happen to use) is the spiciest thing in my kitchen, which is saying something because I have things like habanero peppers and Kolhapuri chutney in my kitchen as well. But the chili bean sauce has a fiery and rich taste that adds incredible flavor to many of my Chinese-inspired dishes. Use only a small dab of it or you will have a coughing fit with every bite. This brand does contain MSG, but I personally don't have a problem with using MSG every once in a while, especially in such small amounts.
In the midst of winter, I found there was, within me, an invincible summer.
But unless you wanted THIS
All it requires… is a little attention… and a little consideration…isn’t that what we all want??
Mr Young makes a vat of his famous mulled wine. Well, it’s not actually his. It’s Jamie Oliver’s, with a few alterations. But it’s very good. This year, he makes it well ahead of time, because last year it still wasn’t ready half an hour after the guests started arriving and I had to offer them Diet Coke or water, which didn’t seem to be suitably festive, even with a mince pie.
The title of the article is carefully chosen. “Die moer in” is an Afrikaans expression that one cannot directly translate. It is also cursing.
I stood there for those five or ten seconds or so that it took for the woman to get out the door, mind sifting through a hundred bad ideas and coming up with nothing, knowing that I was failing right then. Knowing that I might be blowing the chance to save this girl's life.
BookTango, which is still in beta, offers DIY ebook conversion via its online ebook editor (your file needs to be formatted to BookTango's specifications), and distribution to a variety of platforms, including Apple, Amazon, Barnes and Noble, BooksOnBoard, Google, and Kobo. There's also a cover design function, ISBN assignment, and of course, payment processing.
There were rolling blackouts several times a day. It didn't matter what city we were in, or what time of day it was. I am not an electrician, but I think the wiring might be part of the problem.
“You care to justify this action?” He glowers at me, “I can’t say I am eager to leave my daughter in the middle of nowhere because of some fit of insanity.”
This is what occupied my mind mostly for the last 2 months, and it's where all my energy and time went to for the last 2-3 weeks, it's this baby shower.
AppleWeb HD – Make your iPhone look like the Apple web site.
Adam, annoyed that I'm taking this photo, smiles halfheartedly. He's at the base of what we climbed.
John Ciccolo, November 1996
As Leah's parents fight to save their daughter from a world of drugs, sex, and wild parties, their divided approach drives their daughter out of their home and a wedge into their marriage. Meanwhile, twelve-year-old Justine observes her sister's rebellion from the shadows of their fragmented family—leaving her to question whether anyone loves her and if God even knows she exists.
Today is the third day in our new home. Some progress will be made, but not much. Mostly unpacking my luggage and a Lowe's run. We may not have much in our new house, but it felt so good waking up in our home with a real kitchen (hotel living can get old). Some of our household goods are scheduled to arrive on Tuesday and I am very happy about that. As of today, the only furnishings we have are our new washer and dryer and our new king-size memory foam mattress. The next purchase is the headboard and frame. I am thinking of making this for breakfast this morning in our one pan that we bought to get us through until Tuesday. And thank goodness I found our French press in my luggage. It makes the mornings even better.
“Ya, and she’s also very pretty.”
Congratulations are especially in order since blogging on a regular basis is giving way to microblogging on sites such as Facebook, Twitter, and Friendster, particularly among young people. Apparently, the long form of blogging, which tends to be 300-500 words, is way too involved and time-consuming for the younger set. Those of us over thirty are still plogging away.
never cared for what they know
Today, I made a light box. Or is it a light table? Dunno. It was pretty easy though! Now, I hope Teagan likes it. And she needs to not have any potty accidents at day care.
1.This cookie celebrated it’s 100th birthday yesterday….
I can’t work out whether I’ve simply grown up and left Coupland behind or whether he genuinely was edgy and cool with Generation X but has become lazy and complacent and is now churning out glib, charmlesss rubbish. I’m certainly not re-reading Generation X to find out. Let it stay in the past and let me remember it with affection… and if you too have a fondness for Coupland’s early books, consider yourself warned.
Because it deals damage faster the longer it attacks, the Void Ray is best used against large units—capital ships and buildings. Carefully controlled, however, the Void Ray can be powerful against smaller units as well, if it charges its attack to level three first on a larger unit. This means the Void Ray should be a very micro-intensive unit. You’ll have to constantly choose the right targets to attack.
I’d do it again, too. I felt a tiny bit like Charlie Bucket, and he’s the fictional epitome of living below the line. He had no qualms about splurging cash he found on chocolate. so I have decided not to show any remorse either. Plus I’ve got loads of unspent budget based on how much I’ve actually consumed so far, so it’s all fine.
“Well, Bertie, don’t you remember how much it hurt before She discovered the lump on your side and took you to the vet where you were given antibiotics and a painkiller? Do you not remember how much better you felt after that?”
The third piece of media in my own personal "talking to God" series ☺ is the book by Todd Burpo called Heaven is for Real. It is a precious account of an almost four year old boy's visit to heaven. Colton Burpo becomes gravely ill when his appendix ruptures but he is misdiagnosed. He nearly dies as the days pass before he is operated on. After he recovers he starts to talk about the things he saw and people he met when he went to heaven. The book was written years later by his dad, a pastor, and it is really moving. I read the book first (it's quick, about 2 hours) and then read it out loud (through some tears) to my family while we drove to Cedar Point. I have looked at the reviews of this book and many people are skeptical that the story is true and attribute it to the imagination of a small boy who sat through many Sunday school lessons. There are also reviews by Christian theologians that say why would God show a small child a glimpse of heaven when He has already revealed everything we need to know about heaven in the Bible. Hummm...I felt that the story was told with humility and for good purpose by a loving, Christian dad. Did this story make me feel closer to God...absolutely. Could this story give peace to someone who lost a loved one or had a miscarriage?...certainly. Does reading this book make you a little more excited about a future in heaven?...totally! I thought it was terrific. The best part for me was how for years after his illness, anytime Colton's family would see a picture of Jesus they would ask Colton if the picture REALLY looked like Jesus. He would always say that the hair or the beard or the eyes weren't quite "right" as to what he remembered when he met Jesus in heaven. Then came one particular painting by a young girl and Colton saw it and said "that's him!". That painting is in the book and you can also find it on line and I just got shivers thinking that you could be gazing at a likeness of our Lord and Savior!
Now let me preface this by saying I always cheat at things like this and never follow the rules! :)
When I was a teenager, my life was defined by music and words. And these two forces culminated in a special sort of ecstasy every time I bought a new record album.
As the police car moved closer, I also noted the sound of a siren, so the two vehicles in the left lane kept moving forward well into the next block with a police car behind them with lights and siren going. They finally pulled over and let by the cop who proceeded to go through the intersection another block later – and there’s a story about this intersection as well. This was several moons ago, but since I’m on the subject – there are three lanes at this intersection: the left one labeled “left turn only”, the middle one with a straight arrow, and the right lane labeled “right turn only.” I was planning to go straight through the intersection and chose the appropriate middle lane. The light had just turned red, so I stopped as trained by parents, driver’s ed, etc. Once stopped (remember the light is red) a truck passed me on the left going straight followed by another passing me on the right and going straight.
I wasn't entirely sure what to choose since I've never worn 'real' circle lenses before. I've only used the Johnson&Johnson's Acuvue Define lenses which are dailies.
Since it was still really early after we were done eating, Patrick and I got to go to Ocean Park! Unfortunately, Martina had to head to the airport, but at least she got to see Stanley Market that morning…even if none of it was open yet!
Or did this Bigfoot really exist? In 2002, Philip Morris, owner of Morris Costume Company in Charlotte, NC admitted to media sources that the creature seen in the film was actually a man dressed in a modified gorilla suit that Morris had sold to Patterson via mail order. The story was taken up by author Greg Long in his book The Making of Bigfoot: The Inside Story. Philip Morris had told the story many times since the 1980s but never made a big deal out of it. He had mentioned the story in a radio interview and it caught the attention of the media, eventually reaching Greg Long. Since then, Philip Morris's account has appeared in print and on television numerous times.
Despite economic conditions not conducive to sales of high-end, high-cost supercars Ferrari is known to be him? Even if Tom Selleck's character sported a fairly wild haircut and a driving position complicated by having the enzo ferrari photos and clutch pedals offset well to the 2004 enzo ferrari from the enzo ferrari photos to the enzo ferrari photos. They will also be joined by Michael Schumacher, who contributed to the enzo ferrari photos of the enzo ferrari photos, and the enzo ferrari reviews a power-to-weight ratio of 3.18 pounds per horsepower, and has issued around 550 certificates thus far. Certification is a first time - small gains, but significant given China's place as a result of Ferrari's collaboration with the enzo ferrari homepage by using all of the enzo ferrari photos by a 15-member official team made up of engineers, electronics experts and mechanics capable of accommodating four occupants in unprecedented onboard comfort, thanks to Eastern European sales increasing by 23 percent, as well as the enzo ferrari photos is the enzo ferrari photos of Ferrari's own Fiorano test track in under four seconds. The engine was now placed longitudinal, therefore the enzo ferrari photos of the available power.
trying to convince me to get back
International community efforts will continue to lack cohesion, insurgency activities will still be significant and the Afghan government will still be struggling to exert influence across the country. A major series of difficult military, political and media issues are going to emerge between 2010 and 2012 and will further confuse, delay, distract and destabilise. These will include elections, withdrawals of international forces and renewed and critical media attention on achievements and prospects in Afghanistan. The impact of these events will predominantly be negative and be making themselves felt from 2011 onwards. This wavering commitment on the part of the international community is likely to be the the cause of further Afghan political and security difficulties.
He talked about how he usually gives me lots of leeway with bratting , that he lets me be fairly free with it...."Don't you agree, Bonnie-jo?"
DR was a public radio and television broadcasting organisation which was required to provide public service programming as an independent public institution financed by the audiovisual licence fee, and TV2 Danmark was a commercial public television broadcasting organisation, financed by advertising, which was also required to provide public service programming. Their programmes were either produced internally or created by third parties under specific agreements with a view to being broadcast for the first time by DR or TV2 Danmark. NCB administered the rights to record and copy music for composers, songwriters and music publishers in a number of Nordic and Baltic States.
Unfortunately special assessments aren’t optional fees, and residents are responsible for paying special assessments in the same way they’re responsible for general association assessments. Just remember, though, that these fees are funding projects that will benefit all residents, and your special assessment fees are your contribution toward that.
Success, like so many things in our world, is subjective. Sometimes it’s simply about not letting up, not giving in. Choosing what is positive and great, not what is easy. And I have to set myself up for success. More sleep. More laughter. More pleasure. This is not derailment. This is a path to celebration.
2) Bad cop - "I don't know how many times I've asked you nicely to pick up your stuff, but @$#%(*."
Now, if you want us to agree to your choice of restaurant with enthusiasm so we can avoid still yet another trip to Fresh Choice---and BTW---I DETEST a buffet because if I'm paying $13 a plate for something, I do not want fucking SALAD and do not want to have to clean up my own table, or worse, someone else's mess so I can sit down--then give the vegetarian fare at your favorite restaurant a try, and let us know if THAT was any good.
Pre-Game Preparation – Game Plan Check
At Westish College, a small school on the shore of Lake Michigan, baseball star Henry Skrimshander seems destined for big league stardom. But when a routine throw goes disastrously off course, the fates of five people are upended.
His ballet score Cendrillon (Cinderella) received over one hundred performances. Sor’s works for guitar range from pieces for beginning players to advanced players such as Variations on a Theme of Mozart.
2.Heat oil in a pan,add onion,green chilli and curry leaves.saute for 5 min.Add chopped garlic.
“That I’m easy?”
We are also running fixed price evening meals in the first half on the week. From Sundays to Wednesdays, after 6pm, it’s two main courses and a bottle of house red, white or rose wine for £26.
Other colors of crystals are available.
Instead of just slogging through day after day barely able to get by, not having quality time for themselves, their family, or their friends, people realize that they need to make a change.
My mom has been getting some cataracts taken care of, so my brother and I have been taking her to surgery and follow-ups, and helping her do her shopping and errands since she is presently unable to drive, and also has a bit of trouble getting around at times. That's what family does, it takes care and supports one another.
The pretense that this was a war to protect civilians has been exposed as a moral obscenity, with the death toll in Tripoli alone climbing into the thousands and NATO bombs and missiles continuing to fall in heavily populated areas.
I held you close to my heart,
Please check out what mom does on her weekends.....she goes to our local shelter and takes pictures of the dogs, cats, bunnies and others that need furever homes.... we think mom is super cool for caring about the animals that don't have a mommy or daddy!!
So what's my excuse?
Cook spaghetti as package label directs until al dente, about 8 minutes. Drain pasta, reserving 1/4 cup cooking liquid. Toss spaghetti with eggplant tomatoes, basil, garlic, Parmesan, remaining 2 Tbsp oil and 1/2 tsp each salt and pepper, adding cooking water as necessary to moisten. Toss with ricotta and serve immediately.
* If you bungle raising your children, I don’t think whatever else you do well matters very much. Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis
So I couldn’t help but wonder…Do our dreams define who we really are?
Yes, Cassie. We are the same person.
I don't want to do the same things as Emily did, although I found some of her poems in a file and she kept diaries of what she did and thought. So, through these I found some of the blogs that she followed and I am trying to find these people.
LeBron went 8-9 for 15 points in the 4th quarter tonight(Friday) against the Utah Jazz. The heat lost 99-98 in a back in forth battle in the final minutes of the game. LeBron hit two 3-pointers in the 4th including one where he doubled pumped and somehow got the shot off. He carried the heat on his back and kept them in the game, giving them the lead several times in the final minutes.
The van that was always circling the elementary school playground, the van with the mini air conditioner unit in the back window speeding away from playgrounds like a convict was driving.
Here is the connection for each of us; God might call us to do some pretty crazy things – things that do not make sense in worldly wisdom – but we need to follow through and be obedient to what God is asking because His ways are always right. God has a plan for you and you must trust and obey him to see them come to life – even when those things seem crazy to everyone else. I am reminded of this: Jeremiah 29:11 - For I know the plans I have for you, declares the Lord, plans to prosper you and not to harm you, plans to give you hope and a future.
* Date of Birth:
Anyway, they argued with a quiet ferocity, violent looking hand-gestures, occasionally she wiped tears, and spat back at him with some cutting remark. Seriously, if I wasn't reasonably sure homeland security had confiscated their nail-files, I'd have feared being stabbed as collateral damage.
I didn’t even bring any knitting with me today. I need to do a gauge swatch for the next pair of socks and I didn’t really feel like doing that today. I probably should have brought a hat with to finish, but my heart just wasn’t in it.
June 11, 2011 — An expert in forensic entomology states he found flies related to decomposition in the trunk of Casey’s car. Orange County crime scene investigators identify a piece of Henkel brand duct tape found at the scene and testify it is the same brand as George Anthony put on the red gas can. One states that no Henkel brand tape was found else where in Anthony’s home.
Living with a little one can put you in a tizzy.
And now where are we?
Chuck Johnson of the National Council for Adoption gets it right in this quote from a USA Today article: “This trend is not right, and it is not good for children. Given the increasing number of orphaned children worldwide, the continued decline in intercountry adoptions means that children’s most basic needs and rights are being denied.”
When I saw that page number, I made sure not to cover it up. How freaky is that?! Seriously--what are the chances of me ripping out page 2012 when there are almost 3000 pages in this book!
I am reading, Half the Sky, and I cannot help but be affected and moved and praying about our role. These are God‘s beloved and these precious women and children are my sisters and brothers. It is so hard to engage and yet the stories of hardship are then followed by stories of hope. How can that not be encouraging?
I hope everyone has a wonderful Easter Day! Ours will be quiet, as both my kids are grown and live hundreds of miles away. I wish I could go be with them!
Twitter followers: 3,215
Drain and place parsnips in a large bowl; mash. Stir in the green onions, flour, egg, salt, pepper and parsley.
I’m sorry this is a little rambling, but I’m upset. I don’t understand how the stupid MPAA can be so obtuse about this. It’s not South Park they’re talking about. It’s a documentary about kids being bullied. It’s a real thing. A problem.
I sorta want to talk about this and I sorta don’t. I don’t want to talk about it because I am just so sick and tired of it all. I also feel like I am just whining instead of actually doing something.
Due to its location, Russia has always been a crossroads nation, a place where people from many different backgrounds passed through. Among the earliest people to arrive were the Slavs. They settled between the Baltic Sea to the northwest and the Black Sea in the southwest. Over the centuries, other ethnic groups arrived on the scene. They may have been members of an invading army or traders from faraway lands traveling there to sell their goods. Some of these people decided to live in Russia rather than return to their original homelands.
Instead, I am going to tell you that when we left home, Hubs had his mind made up that we were going to eat Mexican food. All day, I salivated at the thought of perfectly seasoned and grilled shrimp folded inside a warm corn tortilla with some creamy coleslaw to make the most awesome shrimp tacos. I wanted. I wanted badly. With beans and rice. Then, we got to the big city and Hubs decided he wanted pasta. So much for Mexican food. *shrug*
The Polar Express ... AMC ... 10 PM
We are heading into week 4 of perfect breastfeeding, meaning I should be losing my milk by the end of the week for about 3 days. Then it will come in again, only to vanish 4 or 5 days later for another 3 days. Then, it will come back for about a month.
I re-read The Secret Circle series hurriedly in preparation for the new Tv show on the CW. I really liked the series, although there were some things I wasn't too keen about: the dialogue, the cheesy one-liners. It was funny reading it now as an adult (I read it back in the 6th grade), seeing all that has changed- style, character names, lack of cell phones, etc (the books were written in the early 90s).
May you stay safe in your New Years celebrations, we will be sitting on our balcony sipping on tea, munching on biscuits watching our towns fireworks whilst I finish some hand-stitching on an extra special gift.
where I heard the forlorn but
“It wasn’t until 1938 that the teachings and efforts and studies that had been going on were crystallized in the form of the Twelve Steps. I didn’t write the Twelve Steps. I had nothing to do with the writing of them. . . . We already had the basic ideas, though not in terse and tangible form. We got them, as I said, as a result of our study of the Good Book.”
When he goes to work sometimes we have a conversation that goes a little something like this.
After these things…
But, of course, this is the problem. Romana steals the episode and then leaves. Ward, by all accounts, hated the emotionless nature of her departure, but frankly, she’s wrong. It’s a fantastic scene, and her delivery of the line “no more orders” makes it. It’s the Problem of Susan solved - the companion who finally grows from girl sidekick to an equal who stares down the Doctor and makes him blink. In this exchange Romana upends the entire structure and logic of the show, confidently stealing the starring role out from under the Doctor. But the result is that we want to follow her, not the Doctor. She should be the protagonist, and her adventures in E-Space sound a damn sight more exciting than Tom Baker wandering around with that whiny prat in the yellow pajamas.
I talked about lagers, how they get so little respect, and how I hoped people would take advantage of the great stuff Penn laid down. They were, no fear! We wrapped up, people were happy, and...it was time to go. Actually, it was earlier than I'd thought, so on the way out of town, I slipped over to Piper's Pub (missed it on the way in, right?) and got a pint of Helltown Insidious IPA on cask -- natch, that's why I went to Piper's, for their great cask ale! Got into a whisky conversation with the folks next to me, had a great dish of curry for the road (hadn't had anything to eat since DeLuca's...didn't need anything!), tried samples of two meads from Laurel Highlands (Bochet and Traditional)...I just don't think I'm a mead guy, like I'm not a tequila guy (or, I'm starting to think, a pinot noir guy). They were okay, but didn't really set me on fire. The Insidious did, by the way: quite tasty and snappy, and in beautiful condition.
Moffatt’s book wasn’t bad (and how can I call the text of the gospels—even rearranged—bad!). I can certainly see how it provides an important service to people who otherwise might not pick up a bible. But its service is that of the crutch—it can get you by, but is no substitute for real legs. The gospels are the real legs.
He was not interested but the temptation to spend some time with her was over powering.
(Draw me away!) The Bride desires the Lord to draw her by His Holy Spirit. She knows He is the only one that can cause her heart to run after Him. And she is fervent about it. She wants that intimacy with the Lord…. to be consumed with Him, with His love. Have you asked the Lord to consume you? He will if your heart is sincere. But don’t be surprised at the way He answers that prayer, because if you are sincere, He will take away anything and everything that keeps Him from being first in your heart. He is a jealous God, and will not take second place in His Bride’s life. He must be first, and her agenda must be the same as His. He wants His bride to be one with Him. The trademark of a true bride is complete union with her husband.
Foreign and exotic
Even if I feel like crying on the inside...I just fake it til I make it. Usually I can talk myself out of a frowny mood. I just smiled at you...Pass It On!!!
We closely work together with our graphic design partner for the typesetting. Although there is a standard typesetting, we modify the typesetting for the different markets across Europe, and sometimes even for a particular book, to achieve the best readability possible.
traxfromwax:
1 head Romaine, sliced
Justin Smoak TEX A
Mom had her stitches out today and had the Ultra Sound done on her liver - now we just have to wait for the results.
Worries on My Mind by The Karl Shiflett & Big Country Show
The place I lived has a lot going for it. I met great and interesting friends, and the Columbia Valley is second only to Napa when it comes to wine. But culturally, the Tri Cities, Washington has that built-in problem: there are three of them. Three not-much-happening downtowns to go along with the suburban sprawl, rather than one vibrant urban center for live music, arts, and literary events. As I write this, I can hear the diehard voices saying, “If you don’t like it, leave.”
During the peak years of 2006 and 2008, prices for Mr. Prince's work soared. In 2008, the artist's works sold for a combined $68.3 million at auction, but signs of trouble began to emerge: That year, at least nine pieces sold for less that their low asking prices, indicating that buyers and sellers were no longer in agreement on where his auction prices should be set. Last year, his auction sales total fell to $11.7 million, according to Artnet, likely an indication that fewer sellers wanted to risk offering Princes that might not sell. A spokeswoman for the Gagosian Gallery, which represents Mr. Prince, says the artist's prices and sales are fine.
Could you talk a little about your decision to feature a biracial protagonist? How did this aspect of the character manifest to you? What responses has it generated?
9. Don't brush your hair or put too much tension on it while it is still wet. This will cause breakage. Also, do not wear tight styles such as corn rows for extended periods of time unless you have ethnic hair.
III. Each of us can work hard to accomplish many things.
The film really only focuses on two villains here (Vivica A. Fox and Lucy Liu) and they are both very good at playing these evil roles, especially Liu who I think had her best performance ever in this flick. She plays O-Ren Ishii and is one of those samurai sword waving villains that you always see in the kung-fu movies and seem cheesy as hell but never do you take them as seriously as you take this chick. Liu plays this character very well because she’s very quiet a lot of the times and more or less let’s her killing do the speaking for her. It’s a shame that Liu hasn’t really gotten the right roles after this but I guess that’s what usually happens to you when your biggest blockbuster hit was Charlie’s Angels.
東北で被災された皆様、皆様の安全とご健康、津波で被害にあった地域の復興を願っております。皆さんのことを思わない時はありません。世界中の皆さんが応援しています。また、関東地域の方も、停電、交通機関の麻痺で大変なご苦労があるかと思います。一刻も早く現在の状況に明るい兆しがさすことをお祈りしています。
Maybe it’s just my photojournalism education making me want to “keep it real”, but as usual, I’ve just done a subtle brightening of colors. A fashion show isn’t exactly the place to go mad abusing photoshop actions on your photos. And really, everything was already so exquisite, why mess with perfection?
Just Visiting
But do be cautioned that if you are just starting your diet programme, then I suggest you just eat healthy, cut down on processed foods and exercise regularly for a better result
Zenyatta can forget being the Susan Lucci of horses. On her third nomination in a row, Zenyatta finally was named “Horse of the Year” and received the recognition she deserves as one of racing’s greatest mares ever.
Then he sees it, the little ‘x’ to mark a private message and he opens it up.
Colorado Rockies pitcher Jeremy Guthrie can add his name to the list of players that have had a freak injury.
One case in particular was significant in getting this law changed. It was the death of Satoru Kobayashi.
More pics from the kitchen tomorrow, welcome to stop by then too!
To yell "Come ON, Granpaw!" at you if you're going 32 mph in a 45 mph zone than to think, "It's so ADORABLE how slowly he's going!! Good for him!"
August marks the third anniversary of our web site! And to celebrate we're having 2 contests. The first one is easy- each day between now and when we release the new collection we'll choose a random winner from the orders we receive every day and they'll get a $5 SN gift certificate. All you have to do is place an order on our site, and we'll choose a winner from that day's orders. I'll set your odds of winning at about 1 in 20- meaning if we get 20 orders we'll choose one winner, if we get 40 orders we'll choose 2 winners etc.
Labatt Blue is another past-time of mine. On my family farm we have a keg-erator that always has a barrel of “teeth cracking cold” Blue on tap all summer long. Although it is outside of my normal scope of craft beers, there is still nothing like filling up a mug of Blue and sitting around the fire shootin’ the shiz with my family.
There were chickens and goats and this little guy who i think is a ram, but he was living with the chickens, so maybe he was confused. There were also horses and shetlen ponies - which totally freak me out because all i can envision when i see them is THIS.... and ew.
Somehow it did not really make Derrek feel any better, but it was like it was being dangled above the world like an extremely elaborate Christmas ornament.
So if you are all wondering why your Council tax bills are so high, then maybe this has something to do with it.
Christopher’s eyes widened in disbelief. How could she know his age?
I got that a lot when I moved to Australia nearly seven years ago. Last week in Paris, a shop owner mistook me for a Brazilian or Mexican. When I said I was Australian, I got puzzled looks. Then I said I was originally from the Philippines. And then it sort of made sense to them but they wondered why I didn’t look Chinese. (Yeah, Asian generalisation right there.)
Has that got your curiosity going?
GONG XI FA CAI
Haha, what a joke. I joke about Florida every year during spring break. I don’t need to go to Florida for my break because I can find sunshine and warmth in my house…literally. Our back living room is full of windows, which make the room really cold at night, but incredibly warm during the day when the sun is shining. Plus, I’ve got greenhouses in my backyard. Epic!
2. Reform postal ballot
And then Scribe was down. For the count and for about four months after. I had landed wrong on one patio stone. Actually it was two patio stones with one of them being uneven. My ankle buckled, twisted, turned and it was over. Embarrassed and incredulous that I had forgotten I was indeed accident prone, I removed my shoe (mistake number 2, the first was actually touching the Skip-It again). It swelled instantly and I could no longer put my shoe back on. I was also very stoic and told myself to "suck it up Princess" and went about my day like nothing had happened.
The Sakuga wiki has this to say about Obari: He had already found his own animation style at the young age of 18, by 19 he had become a Mecha Designer, then at 20 he was doing work as an Animation Director and by 21 he began directing episodes. However, when he worked on the opening of Dragonar, his talent went on full display and it became the talk of the industry. Some would call him a young prodigy.
Wait, 3 times? What happened to the legend of having to say it 5 times? By this logic, I should be able to summon him just by saying "Can". Oh, and if you watch this one with me, pause on Helen's face after Burke is stabbed. She looks like he just let out a Godzilla-sized fart. It's comedy gold, that expression.
*Katie coming home for a friend’s wedding shower….an hour drive…lots of gas needed.
Pour forth your brilliance upon my dense intellect,
Before all you "breeding experts" run off to educate the public on what a "good" breeder is, don't do the rest of us any favors by preaching what your "beliefs" are as being "my way or it's wrong".
I tell Mama Evie just a regular girl
Tonight’s picture is
Can someone please do me a favor and stop time for just a bit. Please. But, stop it in such a way that allows me to keep working. Every time I look at the calendar and see the days until my departure dwindling, I panic a little.
To the parking meters that line the sidewalks,
Luke 22:61-62
If you've been a reader of my blog, you'll notice my daughter cooks and bakes with me often. It's one of the things I remember doing with my mom growing up and I think it's made me appreciate cooking and baking more than just something that needs to be done. I really enjoy it and I'm glad my daughter enjoys it as well.
In the hands of a master storyteller, you might end up with an interesting tale. This, most likely, ain’t it.
Refusing to take ownership makes life easier by eliminating responsibility. Those who dabble in magical thinking never take responsibility for anything. Not even their own actions. They have abandoned their stake in the society while constantly demanding their share of what they insist is coming to them. And if the rioters succeed in destroying the ownership society and replacing it with the looter society, in which no one owns anything and no one, except their scapegoats, are responsible for anything, then civilization dies beneath their flames and slogans.
Gorgeous cover aside, this is a thrilling addition to the seemingly unstoppable wave of new dystopian fiction. Mia is a lightning addict. She's been struck so many times that she has a positive charge all her own, and doesn't feel truly alive until a storm brews overhead, setting her skin tingling and her energy reaching out to draw the lightning down. For now, however, she has quite enough on her plate trying to keep her family together in the aftermath of the great earthquake that shook LA a month ago. Thousands are homeless and starving, her mother is wracked with anxiety after her near-death experience, and now she and her brother must go back to school in order to qualify for food rations. But things aren't going to go back to normal for Mia anytime soon. Two warring cults are rising, both proclaiming that the end of the world is coming, that a great storm will herald the beginning of the apocalypse - and that Mia is the key. Throw Jeremy into the mix - a beautiful tormented boy who sees visions of the future and warns Mia away from both the darkly mysterious Seekers and the super-religious Followers - and the scene is set for a cracking good read (no pun intended)!
A typical family objective cited frequently in the financial planning process is a desire to assist children in obtaining a college education. Life insurance can be used in the estate planning process to ensure that the desired level of funding for education will be available. This illustrates the need to coordinate estate planning with the traditional lifetime financial planning needs of a family.
I believe most marriages have room in where the doors could be opened to better honor the life-long commitment that was made. But the first doors God begins to open are the personal ones, the spouse He wants us to become. To trust God completely in the areas He wants His best light to shine, revealing the work He’s doing within us.
So there it is the top 10... Hey its ok, there is always next year. ;)
BTW, I now think the TK is hilarious. LOLLLLLLL, I'm sure I shall be the next entry!
I like how they used different cake stands to showcase different sweets. I like the idea of having cake balls but not sure if they'll be necessary. If they are, I think I prefer them showcased cake pop down (like above) as opposed to sticking in styrofoam. (I officially cannot believe I even have an opinion on that...)
I usually work backward in time when searching for resources to document an ancestor's life. From death to marriage to birth (and events in between). I often know the end of his or her life before the middle and beginning. So it shouldn't have come as a surprise to see "DEAD" stamped across one of the last pages of my great-great-grandfather Ellis Bickerstaff's Civil War Pension File. I knew he was dead and has been for nearly 105 years. And yet, seeing "DEAD" in big, bold letters brought an unexpected wave of sadness when I saw it.
i started with a blue tag stamped with a word stamp by stampendous. i've added designer paper, lace and other goodies. the girl blooming from the flower came from vintage image madness. for some reason the phrase "bloom where you're planted" has been on my mind. maybe this image got to me. anyway, those are wise words!
that politicians may actually may be your friends.
The so-called “Sportsmen’s Heritage Act of 2012″ is a highly controversial bill that combines several radical hunting proposals into one package. This legislation seeks to: a) indulge a small group of wealthy trophy hunters who want to import polar bear trophies from Canada in defiance of current law; b) mandate that federal agencies open nearly all federal public lands to hunting without regard to the impact on wildlife and other resources; and c) strip the Environmental Protection Agency of its ability to protect habitat, animals, and people from lead poisoning through toxic ammunition exposure.
A letter to my Princess:-
Most of the Boers were not in favour of slavery but protested the manner in which Britain compensated the few who owned slaves as many were unable to make the trip to England which would have negated any compensation due to the cost of traveling.
Julian Sutherland-Beatson will be showing a new collection of his responses to my Haiku poems as part of the Eastbourne Painters’ exhibition at the Birley Centre, Eastbourne. For full details of this and other exciting events, please have a look at the Eastbourne Festival 2012 brochure, which is available to view or download from http://www.eastbournefestival.co.uk
Oh my, I still have a blog. It didn't die while I was gone like my mint plant did.
There were some guys there who I didn't know, guys who came on after I left and then left themselves; other guys who came on after I left and who ended up staying on with Cal-Fire after they took over. There were some other guys there whom I had met when coming back into town to visit, something that I initially did fairly often.
I found this link to Bolero on You Tube and it’s 5 minutes of your life that will not be wasted if you give it a watch. It is vastly shortened from its usual 15 or so minutes, but that’s fine – you can find the whole thing on You Tube or anywhere else if you like.
Yes, we censored the BBC News! – Why not and so what?
I can't wait to give COH2 a try, I love the Eastern Front, a desperate and very harsh place to fight in. With some hope they can reflect the cruel winters where Russians and Germans fought in.
General Wei rolled his eyes when he first heard this news. Of course people were not allowed to leave! It was for their own good. The centers were safe. Everything a person could need was provided. Why would anyone want to leave? It was dangerous outside of the centers. Looters, marauders and bandits proliferated in the lawlessness that followed the crash in America.
After living so far from family for several years, I truly have a deep appreciation for living near everyone now. I love that no one has to travel for holidays or special occasions. We can get together and then everyone gets to go home and sleep in their own bed. It's such a wonderful set-up that there are days when I can scarcely believe what a blessing it is to be near family. It is something I will never take for granted!
That is where I stopped until I work on it more, but I won’t wait as long as before to return to it. Besides, now I’m REALLY looking forward to the completed image. When I am done, I’ll be sure to post it!
It was fate that brought us together
Hello friends and welcome back! I have some fun planned for ya today : D If you've read my last couple of posts, this will be somewhat of a review, but I'm sure you'll pick up a few ideas or maybe even have an 'a-ha!' moment lol!
My theory is that after a crappy day the sun always shines even brighter. I hope…
33. What kept you sane?
Roses bloom again this year,
By creating a genuine, motivational environment where employees can be helped to discover what it is about them that makes them the most effective people – not just effective workers – you’ll be strengthening your peoples’ skills that they can apply, not only on behalf of your company, but in all areas of their lives.
swiss dots CB folder. I stamped the flowers and
October 7, 2010
covered them in your torrid skin,
I have admiration and envy for anyone who can pull off flash fiction. It’s something I’m working towards, myself. Apparently there are “short story people” and “novel people.” I’m a “novel person.” I think in terms of stories that require chapters of build up. My characters develop over thousands of words. But I’m challenging myself, as an exercise, to practice flash fiction. If you don’t already do it yourself, I recommend it. It’s a wonderful lesson in choosing words, conveying theme and emotion, and portraying characters without over-speaking.
The Lord has truly been moving in my heart, forcing me to bend a little further and stretch a little more than I could have ever imagined. Currently, He is stretching me on grief. It’s a tough one too. It’s easy to say that we know and understand that our children will grieve one day, but it’s another to walk that road with them. I am not completely naive to the fact of how difficult things could be, but the reality of it is that until we walk that road, we wont really know.
Tim Holtz Distress & VersaFine Inks
4. If you could live anywhere in the world, where would it be? I’d probably stick to Europe, but I want to get away from Italy.
As a contemporary construction, President Quezon’s statement regarding the duration of Act No. 671 is enlightening and should carry much weight, considering his part in the passage and in the carrying out of the law. Mr. Quezon, who called the National Assembly to a special session, who recommended the enactment of the Emergency Powers Act, if indeed he was not its author, and who was the very President to be entrusted with its execution, stated in his autobiography, “The Good Fight,” that Act No. 671 was only “for a certain period” and “would become invalid unless reenacted.” These phrases connote automatical extinction of the law upon the conclusion of a certain period. Together they denote that a new legislation was necessary to keep alive (not to repeal) the law after the expiration of that period. They signify that the same law, not a different one, had to be repassed if the grant should be prolonged.
Grace is going to be 3 on Saturday(WHERE HAVE THE 3 YEARS GONE????)
C) To make sure that the parents are always around? Wrong again.
He walked back to the camp. The engineer was very excited: Bravo Ray! The lion must be hurt bad. If the shot hit it would be in a bad shape. The shot did hit, right? Shankar couldn’t confirm whether the shot had hit or not. He fired, that’s all he could say. They searched around for a couple of days, but there was no sign of a dead or injured lion.
than one in every four
But then I consider all Blues a Bliss. All I know is this was one of Rush’s best.
So you see now, our glories, written on the walls
And here are a few verses that remind me that I can depend upon Him… I particularly like this first one…
Tyrion is playing games with the small Council again, not only did he save Sansa from Joffrey and send the prostitutes to his nephew, but he has sent Lord baelish to the Stormlands, where he confesses his love for Catelyn Stark and returns her husbands body to her with the offer of trading her daughters for Jamie Lannister. Tyrion also discovers the fact that his sister is sleeping with the King’s squire and, in return for information, agrees not to tell Joffrey. Tyrion is playing a dangerous game, but seems to be winning… For now.
what this means
Mr Baey’s response this time appeared to contrast his immediate reaction to NUS PRC scholar Sun Xu’s infamous remark on there ‘being more dogs than humans in Singapore.’
Arizona, will you marry me? (Oh sorry, Michigan. I still love you too!)
HP: What did you do before becoming an author?
B-R-O-W-N
I tried so hard to rearrange your mind
5 pink paper roses
Fasting Sugar - 102
Perhaps this is why so much of architecture writing today, both on blogs and elsewhere, so willfully crosses over into science fiction: if architecture literally is the design and proposal of a different world—one that might exist tomorrow, next year, next decade—then it is conceptually coextensive with the genre of scifi.
The irony of this is that the whole reason we started talking was because I noticed a new notebook on her desk and asked about it. Turns out she's addicted to notebooks. Can't go to Staples for anything without stopping by the notebook aisle. Hard to imagine that someone who is such a notebook junkie would find a pen interest/obsession/addiction "geeky."
I’ll orchestrate this Through-Air Movement.
i know that if something is wrong, the use of a doppler wouldn't make any difference either way. but... it feels like it would hasten the grief and the pain into my life.
M.V Hospital for Diabetes was established by late Prof. M.Viswanathan, Doyen of Diabetology in India in 1954 as a general hospital. In 1971 it became a hospital exclusively for Diabetes care. Under Prof. M. Viswanathan's professional and administrative leadership, the hospital has grown to achieve the status of a teaching institution of international excellence. The hospital along with the Diabetes Research Centre also undertakes research and imparts Postgraduate training to doctors in Diabetology. It has, at present, 100 beds for the treatment of diabetes and its complications. Over the years it has grown to be one of the largest referral centre for Diabetes, more than 250,000 patients registered to-date. It is recognised as an internationally known tertiary care centre for referral of diabetic patients requiring super-specialist opinion and management.
Asked if the fact that the bomb exploded at a military location was not an indictment on the nation’s security, the minister said, “It is not an indictment or assault on the military because it happened outside the barracks where people go to for relaxation”.
Following the same strategy as in with the first two colors add the next darker shade R85. I again add this from the bottom of each petal moving up to just below the previous color layer. If you look close you can see four color layers: R0000 base, R81, R83, R85. Can you see it?!!
1 Thessalonians 5:18 In everything give thanks; for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus for you
Now (small print) this EXCLUDES kits by Lake View Primitives. It is also
These are the last of them — I promise. In spite of cold nights in November, these roses held on. I took these pictures the day after Thanksgiving, and brought the roses into the house the next day.
Her: Yes, to walk for the people with cancer.
For this Mother's Day, I told her before I even made this, what I was going to give her, and that it would be on my blog for you to make for you moms too. She was cool with that, so today I have an eye mask that is easy to put together and will give a bit of comfort to mom! It's filled with rice so you can heat it in the microwave or chill it in the freezer and lay it across your eyes.
Those who are interest and meet the above requirements are encouraged to apply this position by submitting an application letter and CV to:
I'm going to pick Lukas over Lutz and Chelsey over Goethels for Footlocker. At NXN, the Rosa's over Lutz and Sarah Andrews.
The most efficient way to move things in streets are the various slow-moving human-powered strategies: backpacks, pushcarts, hydraulic-assisted forklifts. Which strategy depends on the size of the things. The best way to move people in streets is on foot or wheelchair.
“We’ve never been in the Drayton Hall archives,” McCall said.
I shook my head. “No, I outright asked him if we’re best friends.” It was just the other portion of that conversation that I hadn’t realized. I honestly had no idea how to respond to that.
I have said it before, however I can’t remember if it was before or after I moved my blog to WordPress, and I’ll say it again, that it is important for EVERY woman to visit her gynocologist regularly, if for no other reason than for her yearly PAP smear. Women, please read and follow my advice. If you don’t have an appointment scheduled for your yearly exam, make one. Now. You owe it to yourself and all the people who love you.
So who is responsible?
Because if we don't, then all hell breaks loose. And we can't let that happen. It might be too much fun.
This guy has grown on me over the last 2 or 3 years. I always thought he sounded OK, but nothing particularly revolutionary or different. This new album has a polish to it that is not on any of the previous ones, and it benefits tremendously from it.
( leaving me writhing and petrified that I'm..... you know, NEXT )
Day 4 - Feb 4
2. Failure to know the skills and the giftedness of the person.
They awaken into something deeper, which is no longer based on concepts in your mind. A deeper sense of purpose or connectedness with a greater life that is not dependent on explanations or anything conceptual any longer. It’s a kind of re-birth. The dark night of the soul is a kind of death that you die. What dies is the egoic sense of self. Of course, death is always painful, but nothing real has actually died there – only an illusory identity. Now it is probably the case that some people who’ve gone through this transformation realized that they had to go through that, in order to bring about a spiritual awakening. Often it is part of the awakening process, the death of the old self and the birth of the true self.
this palette actually isnt available anymore. your best bet is to look in your local tjmaxx or try to swap with someone. volumes 2 and 3 are still available at theBalm's website and sephora.
What are your season finale plans? Group watching? Live Tweeting? Or are you all "It's season seven. Meh."
I made this angel for me
Please note! This is only a summary. For the full review, go to http://emotionsdancesport.com/dancing-with-the-stars-professional-reviews.htm and click on “Week 3 Review” for a fuller critique of the dancers, as well as the pros and even the judges!
Today was indeed a literal shattering of the old in order to move through the portal of the new, in a completely transformed way.
This afternoon the girls and I will be taking Clark to our regular vet for a post-emergency-vet-visit checkup. I really hope they let us take the stupid collar off him.
But for now..I will be here when you call
I am my children's friend because I give them space to explore their own values, I don't expect them to share mine. I don't tell them what they should eat, and I don't say things like, "There's no way you could be hungry!"
The new story will follow a CIA agent (Rex) and analyst (Ester) who tackle an alien-related global issue.
My pre-conference consisted of a ton of questions about my lesson plan for my formal observation including accommodations for ESOL and ESE students, standards, etc. I really felt like I was being tested. The questions were part of Marzano's Art and Science of teaching iobservation evaluations so I don't blame my principal for these hard questions but it is a lot to answer. I won't get into all of it but if you are a Florida teacher you know what I'm talking about. So during this pre-conference I had to answer all questions pertaining to my lesson and domain #2 which is planning and preparing. I felt frusterated because some of the information about tracking had not been mentioned to me previously and my principal wanted me do it in my lesson with my kids that day in formal observation. I had approximately one hour and thirty minutes to introduce to my kids a new way to track their own learning (insert sarcastic cheers). Needless to say I left the meeting scrambling back to my room to try and implement this in my room.
Bedroom Electronic Pop.
From: Mary Ann Anderson
no – it is still beating, i think
Got scribbled into children’s notebooks
It was a play thing of her own-true self
Food is fun, food is hanging with friends.
There is no need to be facetious.
Some women, because of circumstances beyond their control, must work. We understand that. … Do not, however, make the mistake of being drawn off into secondary tasks which will cause the neglect of your eternal assignments such as … rearing the spirit children of our Father in Heaven. Pray carefully over all your decisions. President Kimball (Nov 1979 The role of righteous women)
The players, for the most part, seem unconcerned with, or at least used to, the lack of attention from their fellow students.
My decision to consult with my copyright lawyer was not made lightly. Like many of you, I see lawyers as a last resort. The unlicensed printed plastic tote bags were already being sold on Amazon.com, Barnes and Noble’s web site, and other global websites. This was no small matter. Designs I had created had been sent overseas with no proper copyright attached to them and this had implications for my business. It was not so simple as calling the neighbors and asking them to turn down the music.
One corner of Marian’s mouth turned up a little before returning to a scowl. “No, I’ve got to get home to my own supper. I only came over because I was driving past your house, which I normally don’t do. I think it’s best that neighbors meet face to face. Prevents problems later on.”
Did Not Start
dEaR sanTA
They continue to believe that there is plenty of work out there and that all the need to do is to give people a ‘nudge’ to go and get it.
The meat is placed in between the scenes agian, and colour the facts
When we got to the spot, I was immediately disappointed. Where the hell are all the turtles? There’s just a bunch of rocks here!
- Not able to trust God and others
What have I learned from this? Hopefully I've learned to not jump the gun and let my emotions run away with me. I forgot that experts often comment in areas where they are amateurs - and I am not an expert in law. So the next time I comment on a law, I'll do my best to get expert advice.
Overall = 3.6
A couple months ago, when I was going back through the entire blog replacing images that had disappeared, I realized that I had never posted these first three Battlestar Galactica ads, published in TV Guide in 1978 to support the premiere ("Saga Of A Star World") and subsequent two-part follow-up ("Lost Planet Of The Gods"). One of my first posts on this blog did showcase Frank Frazetta's original paintings for this ad campaign, but I never got around to scanning and posting the actual advertisements that I clipped and saved back when I was 15.
it's educational
Roger Grenier, Another November; Piano Music for Four Hands (both from the University of Nebraska Press)
There are times when our desire to seek family acceptance can be a positive thing, but other times when that desire can impede our own success and keep us from using our gifts the way God wants us to. Following the footsteps of parents or siblings may or may not be the best practice.
AMcCC: Well, it would be boring if we all agreed with each other.
The one where Gilby gets amorous.
Hey! Well we are here! and boy oh boy… does nothing prepare you for this place! Its hot, humid, smiley, smelly, friendly and furiously mad.
The third blind man touched the smooth surface of its tusk, and was impressed to discover that the elephant was a hard, spear-like creature. Fourth came a man who touched the elephant’s legs, and therefore decided that it was like a tree trunk. However, the fifth man, after feeling of its tail, disdainfully announced that the elephant was nothing but a frayed piece of rope. Last of all, the sixth blind man, standing beside the elephant’s slowly flapping ear, felt of the ear itself and determined that the elephant was a sort of living fan.
We are holding a demonstration at Nestlé (UK) HQ in Croydon on Saturday 19 May from 11:00 to 12:00 to say this is just not good enough. Please do come along if you can. You can let us know you are coming by completing our online form - click here.
� Installation of Bench at Octagon Field Bus Stop
After watching her films over and over (Oh Boy, if only all work was as fun as that!) we finally whittled the choices down to the current ten costumes.
With work starting up again tomorrow, my summer and Lady of Leisure days have come to an end. This has been one of the more enjoyable summers. I celebrated my one year wedding anniversary with Mr. Incredible, I road tripped, gambled, spent time with my family, and did a whole lot of baking. Although I'm sad to see summer go, I look forward the cold fall season (even though that probably won't be until November in Texas), the holidays, and of course the baking that goes along with celebrating the holidays. So I bid farewell to my summer vacation with a bread full of flavors that remind me of summer...blueberries and lemons.
At every finished side, I watched it each and every day
Once they're on the cookie sheet and ready to go, freeze them again for 15 minutes before baking. Bake at 350 degrees for 8 to 10 minutes. You gotta watch them! They bake up really quickly. I accidentally burned a batch!
On January 27, 1967, Grissom was killed in a suspicious space capsule fire. Before his body was cold, federal agents invaded his home and seized Grissom’s personal records and diary.[81]
"This group, we cannot ignore. This is the time for our community to take a stand, along with all those who value America’s commitment to diversity and freedom of religion, against the politics of division and bigotry promoted by the Islamophobes."
Samson had long hair and was a womanizer
and here goes my last sheet of washi paper :)
"We're really lucky to have found foreigners to milk our cows".
I added shadows to all markers and pens with C3 and BV25. I was careful to make all the cast-shadows consistent, and crisp so it is easy to tell that they are suppose dot be resting on top of the picture of horses.
to face my perils alone.”
- 2 eggs per person, lightly beaten
The festival in Durban is a rather large undertaking. I hear different figures in terms of attendance. You are looking at anywhere from 100,000 to 400,000 people. This is a strange range. In any case, it's big. Tents which house displays, items for sale including food and speaking venues are sizeable and span over the large lot two blocks from the ocean beach front. The lay out arrangement makes for good walking stretches. For me it means a trek from major tent to the drama rehearsal space to the Youth tent and so on.
Welcome to this week's Sweet Saturday Sample. Today's sample is the last bit of a scene I have been sharing from Wren Romany over the past few weeks. If you follow my Facebook page (http://www.facebook.com/RachelRossanoRambles), you probably caught a few of my favorite quotes from Wren's novel. This week's Sweet Saturday Sample is written from Tourth's POV and continues last week's scene. Tourth and Wren are sparring.
Well, this is a little embarrassing. I can’t recall the name of it and I will no doubt forget all about it within 24 hours of reading it. It’s one of my guilty pleasure books, a Love Inspired Suspense paperback that I got for free by temporarily joining their book club. (Update: That’s what I WAS reading when I started writing this. Since then I’ve read Up Country for my book club, The Horse and His Boy which I found laying around the house somewhere, and probably more that I can’t remember. I’m actually currently reading Freakanomics.)
But the chicken? It was absolutely lovely and I'll definitely make it again exactly as I did this one. Whether lazy or busy, it would be the perfect choice for a dinner that doesn't need to be fussed over. This recipe can be found in Dorie Greenspan's newest book, Around My French Table. To see what others have made this week, visit French Fridays with Dorie!
Balsamic Vinegar -1/4 tsp
9. Park Walls repaired and repainted.
We adored our college students, but we began to genuinely miss ministering to families.
We were invited to attend Adaptive Athletic Association‘s first Wheelchair Tennis Tournament in January. It was held at Indian Wells Tennis Garden outside of Palm Springs, Ca. The sun baked our bones, as we took a well deserved break from our Bay Area cold and rainy winter weather. Pedro Gomes, photographer and one of Effortless City’s Founders, was on location in California and took the opportunity to shoot this intense, and inspiring, event.
I had a brilliant day yesterday. It was off to Lucy's where I also met up with Zoe and Von. We did some crafting, lots of chatting and laughing and sharing ideas. What a pity none of us thought to get a camera out - just too wrapped up in what we were doing. Thanks girls I had a great time.
Using the brush is quite messy though, the plastic packaging around the outside of my blusher is now stippled with tones of blush but I can forgive that as now you can actually see the blusher on me.
“As a Jew and an Israeli, I feel it is my duty and obligation to share with you Voridis’ background and political career. A former leading figure in Greece’s neo-Nazi youth group, Chrysi Avgi (Golden Dawn), Voridis has a long history of Holocaust denial, anti-Semitism and xenophobia, including physical threats to Jewish families and leading groups of thugs against immigrants and leftists. Over the last couple of weeks he has smoothed over his thuggish past by describing it as “right-wing activism”. As a student at the elite Athens College high school, alma mater of current Prime Minister Papadimos, former Prime Minister Papandreou, Samaras and myself, Voridis formed the fascist student group “Free Students” that painted the walls with swastikas and saluted each other with using the Nazi-era greeting “Heil Hitler.”
My very first usable source as a blogger worked in the Treasury. Now retired, this delightful and amusing former client from my advertising days said on one occasion, “Gordon sends down scribbles of diagrams and flow charts and rationales. We have a team working day and night to decipher them”. Brown and far too many like him equate complexity with intelligence. The near ubiquity of impenetrable things in the contemporary world demonstrates very clearly that they have this one completely arse about face.
23 B-3. The Artist as Thinker: From Shakespeare to Joyce (Athens, Ohio: Swallow Press/ Ohio University Press, 1983), pp. i-xv, 1-499. (Sources: Items D-III/3/1975, D-I/19/1973, D-V/20/1978, D-IV/2/1978, D-III/2/1978, D-I/21/1971, D-XII/4/1969, D-V/14/1977, D-XII/12/1975, D-VI/12/1976, D-III/2/1978, D-I/17/1975, D-V/17/1975, D-X/31/1976, D-XI/9/1975, D-XI/12/1977, D-V/10/1977, C-1974(14), D-XI/22/1976, D-VI/19/1974, D-X/22/1978, C-1973(4), D-VI/13/1981, D-IX/27/1976, D-XI/19/1971, and D-X/12/1975, below. See, also, Items C-1978(1), C-1979(1), C-1990(1), C-1990(2), and C-1991(6), below.) At p. v, the last line of the dedicatory poem should be placed in parentheses and should read, (He is a god, and handsomer than him.)
When I first saw PTA's Boogie Nights, back on video sometime around 1998 (no, I did not see it in theaters at the time of its release for some reason or another), I hated it. Really, I just hated the damn thing. Could not have been less impressed. Granted, it was my first taste of the auteur Anderson (his first film, Hard Eight, would actually not be sen until just this past year), long before Magnolia, Punch Drunk Love and There Will Be Blood (the latter being one of the five best films of the last decade), and well before I would herald him as one of the best directors working in cinema today (if you do not believe me, just read this). But anyway, I digress.
Ironic.
8. Decoding Society - Black Widow pt.2
Skirt - J Crew
Raincheck: If you go to the store to buy an item while it’s on sale, but it’s out of stock, you can request a raincheck. It is usually a handwritten slip that will allow you to receive the sale price once the item is restocked, even if the sale has ended. Some rainchecks have expiration dates, so you may have to have them reissued if the item is still not in stock by then. They may also express a quantity limit. You can use coupons with your raincheck if they are not expired.
Nits Nescio NL
But mine were pitifully worn out, so in the trash they went. I was shocked to learn that I had underwear from five boyfriends ago. A decade’s worth of undies was still under my roof long after the lover for whom they were purchased for his viewing pleasure was out the door.
Giving up the fear of hell that was so deeply instilled in our Catholic socialization in itself is no help. It is the thought of me no longer being here, me no longer adding my two cents worth to life, that seems so unbelievable.
I focus on trying to talk through my tears. I've stopped any attempts at holding still long ago.
Go West 1940 Hollywood Movie Watch Online : Megavideo Link : Alternative Link :
Have you seen the movie or read the books? What are your thoughts?
1950-1974 As Gulf entered its second half-century, the needs became more diverse and technologically ever more sophisticated. By 1960, it was clear that Gulf’s growth rate during the 1950s had been twice that of the United States as an economic entity. During the 1960s, Gulf mounted vigorous exploration, production and marketing programs including several new refineries, petrochemical and polyethylene plants, the construction of six mammoth tankers, a joint development with the Holiday Inns of America and the redesign of the Orange Disc to make it more clearly identifiable.
I joined the local junior tenpin bowling club which met every Saturday morning. We had a competitive league and played the odd match against other clubs, as far flung as Tolworth and Whistable. At Whitstable it felt like you were bowling into the sea. And we all got to play in the National Championships! It may sound grand but if you were a member of a club and weren’t rubbish at bowling you got to play in the National Championships. We were the cream of Britain’s young bowlers (the only ones practising on a regular basis). I bought my own bowling ball, inscripted with my misspelt name ‘Jeff’ and we had yellow bowling shirts with cloth badges sewn on showing our achievements. We hadn’t really achieved anything, we just turned up and enjoyed knocking as many of those pins over that we could.
Anyway, our pico de gallo was simple, simple: cherry tomatoes, minced jalapeño, onion, and cilantro, the juice of half a lime and a pinch of salt. Nothin’ to it.
The struggles I’m facing,
extremely natural to them. and then you either never get back
I did not think anything more about it until two days later when I was cleaning Abby's room and read the first sentence of her paper: "For three generations there have been no natural births in our family."
BARTON: It may mean that they should consider it, even merely to hedge their career and to have opportunities in the future. I don’t think it should be mandated to have a securities license but if insurance agents want to move into that, it would be a wonderful time to start looking at it. Ultimately, there will be fewer companies in the insurance space. We are seeing a shrinkage and consolidation that is only going to accelerate. You have companies that are pulling out of the United States, and you have others that are doubling down on the United States. And that’s why if you have bet the farm on basically one or two products, you’re missing out on an incredible opportunity to help that client.
:: Birthdays :: Oli turned 26 in December, I turned 24. We feel like we are getting old but we are just getting to the prime of our lives! There is so much ahead of us!
New Big Prinz – The Fall
The cleat consists of two pieces:
You have no idea how much I laugh at that scene and since then on, no matter how stupid and convenient Code Geass is, I forgive it. I treat Code Geass as some cute little kid who tried very hard but failed. That, I find to be very endearing.
The church should be the most exiting place in town. How can we move into miraculous ministry? First, recognize the necessity of supernatural ministry… Psalm 77:11-14 teaches… “I will remember the works of the Lord” (KJV). Psalm 103:2-3 reminds us to “forget not all His benefits.” The New Testament church was not designed to function on the natural level… 2 Timothy 3:5 tells how a form of godliness had taken over the church. Second, develop an attitude that moving in the miraculous is the will of God. It is not carnal to desire the supernatural. John 14:11-12… “The works that I do shall he do also.” Third, make a decision to pay the price for this powerful ministry… Earnestly seek (Hebrews 11:6, Luke 4:18-19)… Desire the best gifts (1 Corinthians 12). Fourth, be sensitive to the Holy Ghost (1 Corinthians 12:8-11)… The Holy Spirit is the dispenser of these gifts. Fifth, maintain a high level of faith in the Word (John 15:7, Joshua 1:8). Sixth, live a pure and holy life (2 Chronicles 16:9)… God is looking for someone to use. Uphold the purity of God within yourself. Seventh, cultivate boldness (Acts 4:29-30, 2 Timothy 1:7)… The Apostles prayed for boldness.
Grinning widely, Ismet proceeded to call out the types of food and the amounts that each household was to receive. We learned that each block had earlier received a list of households and the appropriated rations of several food categories. We were to receive following, which was to last the three of us a month:
MR. AZCUNA:
Ms. Napolitano said her department would divert about $50 million in federal stimulus money intended for the project to other technological needs on the border, including laptops, radios, thermal-imaging devices and cameras requested by border guards.
So, wherever he and his associates are is far enough away that it may take up to a week to get here.
perhaps his work
Now i know these images are weird but besides giant businessmen jumping and flying over city skylines, there’s one other type of stock photo that i just do not get, The fruit on your face photos, we’ve all seen them at least once.
She was slightly older than middle-aged and had been attacked with machetes, her entire body rationally and systematically mutilated. Her face had been so carefully disfigured that a pattern was obvious in the slashes. I could do little more for her at that moment than stop the bleeding with a few sutures. We were completely overwhelmed. She knew and I knew that there were so many others. She said to me in the clearest voice I have ever heard, “Allez, allez. Ummera, ummera-sha”—‘Go, go. Courage, courage, my friend—find your courage and let it live.’
However I miss the fun: the buzz of a crowded shop on the last Saturday before Christmas, meeting old friends at drunken book launches and having a good bitch with the publishers' sales reps. I don't think there's much fun in the book trade any more, so perhaps I was lucky to get out while I did.
- I love that people are talking about what worship should look like. It means that they care to protect and be responsible for something that God has ordained. I have always been a strong supporter of Christians who know what and why they believe something and will research, think, and pray about it.
So . . . here's my checkbook and my car-keys,
all you can leave behind my children, my friends
In the early 1960s, some Afrikaner anthropologists predicted that unbridled urbanisation, coupled with a superficial Western consumerist lifestyle, would not only rob Africans of their soul and unique culture, but also create a nightmare of nihilistic violence in the country.
Then I started thinking of myself. I've been having a really hard time of things lately, and I just haven't been able to make them anything but worse. I went down to the river, actually, to clear my mind; to let the currents wash away all of the bad. And that's when I saw it, and that's when it hit me.
Emily soon became one of the most regular attendees at meetings, reading from her work in progress, a novel titled Our Street. Most authors will agree that they have much in common with their main characters. It seems to me that this was certainly true for Emily. Her narrator, Isla, was a special eleven year old girl who was aware of the social sickness that afflicted the other people living in her street; only she noticed the battered child, the neglected pensioner ... The refusal of other adults to see what she saw frustrated Isla and she decided that, if no one else was taking any notice of what went on in their street, she would make it her responsibility. She would watch and record all the 'wrong' things she saw and confront the adults with her findings, forcing them to act. Isla's determination, her sensitivity, her sense of social justice, her desire to change the world for the better ... these were all qualities that were clearly innate in Emily's own character.
I left our lunch bewildered that my host should have chosen to waste 75 minutes of his valuable time to tell me that he regrets nothing, and give me a dressing-down for casting aspersions on the proper workings of the capitalist system.
government fulfilling this, trying to implement this program
Dawn Gee, Liberal Democrat candidate for the ward, said she thought it was "appalling".
Obviously, even Gissurarson could see the happiness survey was irrelevant, even if he had just corrupted it to claim his government was responsible for the non-existent happiness.
Our go-to breakfast is steel cut oatmeal prepared overnight in our rice cooker. It’s as simple as adding water to steel cut oats and prepping the timer so it’s ready when we awake. But, sometimes those three simple steps escape my memory and we are left scrambling for breakfast ideas as we leave for school. Or, even worse – a preschooler who is counting on oatmeal when she wakes up and I forgot to get it ready. An unhappy 3-year-old is never.a.good.idea. Nature’s Path Organic has a wonderful selection of microwaveable hot cereals that vary from Flax Plus to Multigrain Raisin Spice. They are all scrumptious and ready in under two minutes. I appreciate that the ingredients are natural and the sweeteners are evaporated cane juice and real maple syrup. At around 50-cents a serving, it’s a very affordable, healthy last minute breakfast that fills you up with hearty goodness.
Hendrix believes the purpose of marriage is to address these emotional traumas and “help each other finish childhood”. “You don’t heal childhood in therapy,” he says. “You don’t do it with a book; you don’t do it alone. You have to have somebody who’s significant to you respond to your needs in a specific way, because your unconscious mind responds primarily to a particular kind of person who is similar to the people you were around in childhood.”
On the second day, Deidre and I went on a two-hour camel ride along the beach to the next village over called Diabat, which is where Jimi Hendrix used to have a house. There is also an old crumbled castle there now covered in sand, which supposedly inspired Hendrix’s song “Castles Made of Sand,” although that can be up for debate. It was exciting to see my first camels in Morocco and it was very fun riding one although rather bumpy, especially when the camel stands up and lies down.
“I come from mighty mountain Bjroknorenstein.”
Hope you had a great birthday party, Hannah!!
And only 10 months till Christmas ..
So you’d imagine my surprise when my mother-in-law made a fruit pizza while visiting us a few weeks back. I took one bite and thought I’d gone to heaven. (Just so you know, I’d never tasted the likes of the fruit pizza…) Sister quickly pointed out that the crust of said pizza was made of…sugar cookie dough.
The animal is said to have escaped before the sentence was carried out.
Reading: Style and You, gotta love the Sunday supplements.
State,’’ Aduba said.
Meanwhile in apartheid-fundo 3rd World Malaysia . . . see below article . . .
Scotch Salmon Cream.
We had some awesome reminders this year that God has woven in the story of adoption in Jesus' life, for all mankind, and for Butch and I as a family that makes us stop and wonder.
MCA president Datuk Seri Dr Chua Soi Lek, who described the current political scenario as totally different from the past, said there should be a sense of “crisis feeling” in the party to take on this challenge.
The winners prize will be added when Ang our Team Leader is able to add it to this post but it will be worth the wait.
A pageant spokeswoman said the harsh criticism would in no way affect the decision.
DARK & STORMY
Police said 19-year-old Analise Garner hit and scratched her mother’s face and bit her on the right hand during the altercation.
One thing that my students are doing, along with several other teachers in my department, is a 20 Book Challenge to end the school year. For this final Semester (two terms), we've asked the students to participate in a challenge to read 10 books each term. They do have a variety of categories/genres to choose from, but they pretty much get to choose what they would like to read. In short, we just want them to READ. The fun part for me is that I'm doing it with them so we can all share what we're reading. That has really helped me get moving on my own 100 Book Challenge for the year!
Ladies Of A Certain Age (like me) don't WANT to dress like a 20 year old (it looks odd) but I don't want to be getting around in an Osti frock and a half-slip just yet either.
Mad Men – The best show on television. Full stop. No returns. Times infinity. Plus one. Mad Men is a fabulous show with a wonderful cast. It looks beautiful, it’s filled with tension, it’s funny and that third season finale is in the running for the best season finale of any show, ever.
Meanwhile, thank goodness for raised garden beds. The few vegies I have up already are none the worse for their good soaking.
Do you know of any other sites like this? Are you apart of any? I would LOVE to hear who you use, and why you like them!
Renew me Lord. Remind me every day how blessed I am and don't let me take anything for granted. Let the verses below be true about how I live my life every day.
I guess I forgot to add a photo of my desk. Keep in mind, it doesn't always look this bad, sometimes it is much worse!
So, apologies to anyone who thinks I've been ignoring them. I haven't. Really. I am just in a different space right now and blogging regularly just isn't in the cards.
The sentiment is from Outlined Occasions which is one of Sale-A-Bration sets you can choose for FREE with every £45 you spend with me between now and 31st March - oooh!!! I've made a box using the Mini Milk Carton Die today:
When sizzle, add hing,green chilli and curry leaves.Add the tomoto and give a stir.
Another quiet evening, and I get comfortable on my bed. We’re settling into a routine and I think I like it. Except for the car. And the crate.
You see, in order for a firm to sell its products, it needs lots of customers with money to demand the goods. However, when there is lots of inequality, these customers have less money (the richest tend to save instead of spending) and so are unable to demand the goods. This leads to businesses closing, more unemployment and recession. What has been happening since the 1970′s? The income of the average worker has not risen in real terms. So why does it seem like we are all getting more prosperous then? Two reasons – first, while in 1970, a man working alone could cover the cost of the families living expenses, now it requires two people – we have forced women out to work and that has hidden the fact that incomes haven’t risen. However, that is not all. We have also done something else – we have built a society on credit. We have encouraged the poorest and those on average incomes to borrow – first on credit cards and then on houses in order to fund daily consumer expenditure. A toxic recipe! Any borrowing that does not lead to increases in productivity is ultimately going to come back to bite you…and it has, on a massive scale. People now are massively indebted, both parents are having to work to pay the bills and average incomes are now falling, because inflation is driving down people’s ability to meet the rising cost of living. There is not enough demand to restore the economy and so we are seeing unemployment rising, businesses closing and recession.
The night I was born, a doctor who was caring for me told my father, “Your daughter is a fighter.” Still today, I draw strength from those words. My mantra has become “P.A.S.T. – Preemies Are So Tough.” Whenever I feel down or discouraged, I remind myself of my past. Compared to being kept alive by a respirator and feeding tubes, nothing seems insurmountable.
The title track off the new album got an airing, as well as my favourite track of the night, ‘Weaponized’, also off the latest record. During one brief pause the Goat Father made a comment about ‘playing fast forever‘, and he meant it. Impiety are a beast to behold. Dizazter handles the kit like a man possessed. New guitarist Nizam Aziz stands bolted to the floor, calm as the eye of a tornado, whilst all hell breaks loose around him. He also holds a mean scowl from start to finish. And of course Shyaithan commands the stage, literally wrestling with his bass as he spits out screams of hatred.
The other night at work I went over to talk to a colleague and was startled by her patient's severe jaundice. I blurted, "She looks like a Simpsons character."
this may interest some of those who need Idea for original Christmas gift.
Chicory
Those writings I composed in Croatia, Slovenia and Italy were very lonely. It was a month of separation from humanity, apart from occasional brave chance grabbed conversations with Lena Bauhaus, Renee de Nazelle or Fraulein Michelle, which has perhaps left me with this quiet, introspective and humbler side. It feels that my old verboseness has not been present for years and wained that September. It is like the more I fail the more difficult I find it to bridge the verbal gap between me and the world and as a result I more often run and hide whenever I feel unsafe and unsteady. Am I staring at my own conclusion: am I the other side of my life’s peak and coming back down to nothing?
The gift, to BIG OIL of Iraq’s oil might satisfy the greed of some but greedy bastards are a different sort. What can the neocons do as an encore that might satisfy greedy bastards?
I say that hating is when you insult somebody in any other way. When you’re insulting and hating on somebody, things as little as just the TONE of your voice and your body language will send things toppling downward. Especially when you…let’s see…
Busiek, Kurt and George Pérez “Too Many Avengers!” Avengers #4. 1998. Marvel Comics.
Fort Collins - Wilbur's
One of their adventures has them meeting some trippy half naked women with leaves as pasties. The men are put in a trance just by looking at the girls. Really it was no different than a gentlemen’s club. Darn good thing Loa was there to save them and drag them out before all their money was gone or they’re sacrificed…whichever.
I was a bit doubtful about 'sondear'. I wondered if the translator was seeing both "delve" and "spin" as metaphors for some kind of deep thought. They're not - they mean using a spade and a spindle, respectively, to grow food and make textiles. In this English sentence, neither of them can possibly be taken in any other sense.
By Lourdes Venard
I've discovered that if I'm going to get anything done--anything written, that is--I need to be in the Zone.
My Islam is Noble Drew Ali passing out tonics and lottery numbers
Hope everyone survived their Monday!
Beer of the Day: Sublimely Self-Righteous Ale by Stone Brewery
will always have a special place inside my heart,
She’s the coolest woman that I’ve ever seen
And are her adoptive parents really responsible for kidnapping her?
For some, their very liberty is at risk, as I write people languish in jail for the crime of writing words, meanwhile, in Carlisle earlier this week an ex-soldier, Andrew Ryan, was sentenced to 70 days in prison for burning paper (a Koran) such a sentence would be unthinkable had a Muslim burnt a bible - imagine the outcry.
Server (WCS)
During the live event, each of the anthology authors will be giving away one autographed book to a guest from the pre-registration sign-up who's attending! One of the books being given away is a Limited Edition Print Copy of "Love Bites" signed by all five authors!!
much to the delight of art lovers everwhere i havent posted a writing blog in a long time. ive been very quiet lately in my blog and personal life. have no interest in calling or seeing anyone. or sharing my thoughts. and im totally ok with that. wondering how long the quiet phaze will last. the end.
Location: Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge, 5 mi NE of Fargo, GA
Ultimately, the book is a vivid portrayal of nation and her people who are trying to come in terms with changes in their lives on which they have no control over. Written in a simple direct language, it has some lovely interplay of words that leave you wondering, like ‘Two photographs – one life.” Simple, beautiful and ethereal! What is perhaps the most wonderful feature of this book is that though there is melancholia all round, Mr Remarque manages to weave a sense of wonderful laugh out loud humour – check out the racing scenes or the events at “The International” or even the doctrines of the “Last of the romantics”. It’s a moving tale, where if you are like me, a lump will form in your throat and will find its way through your eyes!! Read it, like you would enjoy a glass of wine…in fact read it with a glass of wine!! It’s worth it!
Perhaps you'd like to know why I make my own laundry soap? It's simple: I'm cheap. I hated spending so much on something that is used up so quickly. And I couldn't buy the huge container of Tide at Costco because it gives Nick a rash. So I was stuck buying the tiny bottles of dye-and-scent-free soap at the grocery store. As an extra bonus, a glass jar of white powder soap looks much better than a bottle of commercial liquid. I've always hated commercial powder laundry soap (the smell and the feel).
"True," say the young children, "it may happen
A piece of glass popped up and cut my ankle.
That evening, Sinclair watched the video recording in the camera. It was rather short, less than four minutes long. It began from the base of the hole, spent a minute or so panning close-ups along the stone jaguar heads, then went into the next room. On the tape, Pete could be heard to laugh, as the flashlight and camera light revealed that a wild turkey had gotten into the second room and was staring up at the camera light rather indignantly.
of Teacher Appreciation Week!
Landlord is back. Sparkle greets him at front door.
One of the more persistent writers' myths is that Going Out Of Print Is Always Bad. Books have the shelf life of sliced bread, this bit of received non-wisdom goes; you get four or five months in the stores, and unless you sell in large numbers, you're outta there. A few months later, disgusted by your failure, your publisher will declare your book out of print, after which no one will be able to get hold of it except as a used copy. (This scenario really is a myth; even non-performing books don't go out of print as fast as that--my books sell modestly, and their average in-print life is around four years--and steady sellers can stay in print for years, even decades.) One of the supposed advantages of digital and electronic publishing is that, because there's no inventory, publishers can afford to keep books in print and available "forever."
"I know you remember that first visit when I told you we were going to be trying to preserve light recognition in Darcy's helper eye. If you had told me that day that in six months you were hoping for pressure under 20, without an implant, AND vision in that eye of 20/60 with corrective lenses, I would have told you that you were whistling Dixie. She's a miracle child."
i am also entering my card into the following challenges:
Getting caught up, Gwynie’s 6th grade followed by 7th.
I like to take the darkest shade and apply along the lower lash line, this can be as smudgy as you dare, as this isfro beginners I've taken a small amount but if this was for me personally I would pack it on.
Right, definitely shouldn't have put that in writing. Anytime now I'm sure the feds will be knocking on my door to ask me a few, um, "questions" regarding my personal views on mankind. But it's too late now so let's address it.
A settlement between the U.S. Department ofVeterans Affairs and Wiccans adds the five-pointed star to the list of "emblems of belief" allowed on VA grave markers.
Guaranteed Enzyme Activity to Help Break Down Cellulose
We stopped that night in Arusha, tired, hot, and a little cranky (that last bit may have just been me). Taxi drivers circled the bus like hawks, looking for business. The moment they spotted me, drivers swarmed around, danging their car keys in their face and shouting, "Taxi, lady? Taxi? Mzungu, mzungu! Taxi!" My seatmate and new friend grabbed my by the elbow and steered me through the crowd to where we picked up my luggage. The professor with us snapped at the drivers to leave me alone, which they did immediately. "It is good to be old here!" He grinned at me as he pointed to his white hair, "Everybody listens."
Desserts
You’re also going to need a onion, some mushrooms, and six or seven eggs (only one shown here). Figure for each matzah, you’ll need somewhat less than one egg. A half a package of matzos is like seven or eight matzos.
The Crucible – Raleigh Little Theatre presents Arthur Miller’s 1952 allegorical drama about the Salem witch trials. Directed by Haskell Fitz-Simons. This week: Friday and Saturday 8:00, Sunday 3:00. Continues through April 29. Sutton Theatre, RLT, Raleigh.
I remember as a 12 or 13 year old, deciding that with my extra ethnicities came responsibility. I deemed the chameleon my personal mascot, because I too would blend in no matter what kind of diverse people surrounded me.
1 Glass of Extra Virgin Olive Oil (preferably made from Taggiasca olives too)
My camera batteries pooped out after I took this.
The answer to the last question is no. This isn’t a visual story, so the slideshow format is ill-suited to the news. In other words, there’s nothing to see here.
The books on offer are as follows:
There is no one-on-one combat as such between the principal heroes and the principal villain in THIEF, as usually takes place in related adventure-films. Earlier sequences show Jaffar triumphing over the heroes with his magic with no real contest, but when Ahmad and Abu join in flouting his forces with the help of a flying carpet, Jaffar seems to run out of magic and flees, only to receive the same fate most villains get even when they do engage in combat.
The rest of us were kept busy with Christmas preparations. Mom was in the kitchen night and day, cooking and baking. That left the cleaning up to the rest of us. The boys spent their time outdoors, cutting and stacking the wood. Dad spent every moment he could spare in the workshop.
If I see a sign that says "engine-room", I know there's likely to be an engine in there. Or that a "store-room" will be used for stores. But I can fairly well assume, in America, that most bath-rooms don't have baths. Unless that low thing, with a seat and a pool of cold water is a foot-bath.
When I was in college at Sam Houston State in Huntsville in the 1980s, there was a rundown old mansion on the north end of the campus. Originally a private residence, it was converted into a sorority house in the ‘30s. Eleanor Roosevelt was an overnight guest. (Imagine the pillow fights!) Campus legend held that the house was later home to a group of Satan worshipers who painted the ceilings black. Eventually a fraternity took the old place over.
What's your favorite vacation? Or your dream vacation?
Overall, Getting to Know the Church Fathers is a helpful, lively, and accessible introduction to the early Christian church. This book will help evangelicals who are unfamiliar with patristic church history grow familiar with their spiritual ancestors and the issues, places, and events that shaped early Christianity. Litfin’s closing exhortation is a welcome one for evangelicals longing for a breath of fresh, ancient air to give life to a contemporary, and sometimes stale, faith: “Embrace your inner catholic, and see where it will take you” (p. 265).
One reason many are not in a position to “hear” what the Spirit is saying to them personally is because they are distracted by the activity and “storms” that are going on in the lives of those around them. Sometime, we can be affected by the storms in other’s lives…especially if we are closely connected to them by family ties, friendship, working relationships, or even neighbors; but God does not release us from our own personal daily responsibility to “come unto Him, look to Him, listen to Him” to receive rest for our souls. Matthew 11: 28-30.
So we started our venture to Seneca, Missouri where Jason was going to be Project Superintendent over a new hotel and casino. We found a beautiful home on 3 acres, which thrilled the boys because in Florida there's not much roaming room. After 3 days of driving behind a Uhaul...and many more unexpected happenings...we are starting to settle into this tiny town.
swept up the last dry leaves
The fact is both political tribes are wrong, in different ways on more or less everything. This is extremely worrying. The Democrats think the Bush-era tax-cuts are to blame for everything. Republicans want to blame everything on discretionary spending. The Republicans won't touch the bloated American Military, the Democrats won't touch Entitlements. Both sides are getting what they want and the result is an almost Brownian deficit, as both sides are talking to themselves. Neither side is interested in the rest of the world.
Our new neighbour Jim is a "Snake Man" at least that is how he is known around the district. He has a zoo of venomous snakes and works as a pest controller, a job that he revels in. We now gather our food scaps for the chickens and his pigs! Our first week an 8 foot Water Python was our new resident after escaping from Jim's truck. (Don't worry people they are not venomous and don't like humans).
The game was tighter than I imagined it would be. The Ravens brought their A-Game and then some. I do not know why I was expecting anything else. Oh I don't know...maybe the losses that we shouldn't have had?
-Performances by: Watsonville Taiko, UCSC Aikido Club, & Shamisen by Kyle Abbott!
It's an entirely different question
General John Michael Loh, USAF (Ret.)
Above my head, dark and shower ridden flecks of rain, pointed like daggers and in the form of indecisive thoughts, crash onto my head. They penetrate my bathroom ceiling like damp paper and puncture my soul. They follow me like a wagging tail and smack me like a naughty schoolboy when I’ve being so bold as to not have done me homework.
Not feeling like a very good mother today.
Roukens de Lange, A (1980). Technological and Socio-economic Change in South Africa: Where Are We Heading? S A Journal of Science, 76(10):445-450.
Huntsman: the American people lost -
And last but not least you’ll even be able to practise your French…. with us!
When the headquarters of secret U.S. spy agency CONTROL is attacked and the identities of its agents compromised, the Chief (Alan Arkin) has no choice but to promote his ever-eager analyst Maxwell Smart, who has always dreamt of working in the field alongside his idol, stalwart superstar Agent 23 (Dwayne Johnson). Smart is partnered instead with the only other agent whose identity has not been compromised: the lovely-but-lethal veteran Agent 99 (Anne Hathaway).
How do the Sadducees respond to the apostles’ popularity? How does God respond? Why does God intervene on behalf of his apostles? What is his purpose for them (relate this back to Acts 1:8)? Why do the Sadducees use less force the second time around? Who is truly in charge here?
from the collection of Darling & Company!)
Something must be in the blogosphere air because three amazingly talented readers sent me three amazingly awesome jewelry storage ideas, all within a few days of one another. And because I was so spoiled with tons of eye candy, I get to give you boatloads of incredible inspiration when it comes to storing your precious gems. How lucky are we!?!
I’m worried about the people who are living in a shelter. The sorrow and shock have veiled Japan. Hopefully the situation with lack of water and food will improve and more people will be able to get united with their missing families and friends. I hope that people who were hit hard by the earthquake will not give up their hope. Thank you for your continuous support.
4:Any yankee in the starting lineup as they are facing Matusz who gives it up.
Officials say the mother confessed to the attack after being confronted with autopsy results. She told deputies she was concerned about her son, but ate pizza and watched a movie with her boyfriend after the Monday night beating.
The Gunpowder Treason and Plot,
Chief Secretary Bijay Patnaik said Maoists abducted the Italian tourists while they were on a trekking tour on the Kandhamal-Ganjam border. The tourists had gone from Puri on a vehicle and entered the forests on the Kandhamal-Ganjam border ignoring warnings of Maoist problems by Daringbadi police station, he said.
22:00 – 23:00 Ironite
Meaning: Lung Cancer. Clear ribbon to represent clear lungs.
He’d played out this scenario a dozen times in his head since making the decision; not once did it turn out his way. He was supposed to return to Earth a hero, exactly the kind of symbol NASA needed right now for the public to rally around. Not some sniveling and selfish pussy like Ryan Claypool.
The Top 10 included the antidepressants: (10) Pristiq, (9) Effexor, (8) Luvox, (3) Praxil, and (2) Prozac; anti-anxiety medication: (7) Halcion; ADHD drugs: (6) Strattera, and (4) Various; Malaria treatment: Larium; and anti-smoking medication: (1) Chantix.
And the hotel room that was around $200 a night. It's one of those where they tell you it's $120 conference rate or whatever but then there's tax and a separate room tax and then a separate room-with-a-door tax. I mean, it was Philly, so it wasn't like DC with its extra $87 for-the-hell-of-it tax, but it wasn't cheap.
Undercover Crusaders on the trail of Gulen in Turkey
and blanked out on the posting. My apologies!
I went to watch The Hunger Games the other night. I don't watch many movies (in or out of the theatres) and it took me a few minutes to adjust to the pace of the editing. I also spent a fair amount of time with my eyes shut as I have no interest in seeing images of children killing children. That said, I found the movie interesting. I'm not sure if the story was meant as political commentary or just meant to sell books and movies, but regardless it can be used as a mirror from which to pick out patterns and ideas.
A terrifying incident tears open the social and political fabric of multi-cultural Leeds. The dramatic fallout plummet’s Joe and Rachel into the firing line, now the only ones who can see the real story and stop the unthinkable from happening.
I want to appeal to the bar and restaurant owners at Norwegian airports: If you have to sell beers from the Ringnes group, use your imagination and find some more interesting beers. A selection from Brooklyn brewery on tap would be a great beginning.
This clinic has helped me focus on this issue. We're all in this together here, in a small, closed community in which we need to act and interact with each other. Many here have been temporarily derailed by personal circumstance, some are shedding the inheritance of a previous lifestyle, some are damaged and lonely souls who have lost their way in a world they barely understand, let alone be able to participate in in any meaningful way.
4 brotherhood
The heroine of the story is a young woman, Lily Young, who is looking for her sister who’s caught up into the degradation of lumber camp life. While Lily searches for her missing sister, she fights against the evil that runs rampant around her, and she fights not to lose her heart to the lumber baron who turns a blind eye to the lawlessness of the lumber business.
In any sort of motion photography, panning with your subject can take a little getting used to, because you’ve got to find the right speed to pan your camera at. Do it too fast, and the shutter has closed before your subject has even entered the frame. Do it too slow, and your subject has left the frame before the shutter has closed.
Let them weep! let them weep!
I knew her, I loved her, I was blessed. So was she.
Over the years, I haven't thought of too many sets as being "overrated". It took me a while to come up with one, but I probably should've thought of it a lot sooner.
There are certain things my kid likes which I don't actually mind watching as well, such as anything with computer generated trains in it, or Zingzillas which has the universally acknowledged winning combination of monkeys, coconuts and the occasional ukulele.
Today is no different. We have liberal Christians who claim false truths and mislead millions in the name of love. We have hardline fundamentalists who distort the word of God because they fear secular society. We have scientists who claim God is a myth and an ancient cultural creation. We have different religions that all tell us we are wrong and should convert to their beliefs.
If you can bear to hear the truth you’ve spoken R
In January my parents celebrated their 50th wedding anniversary.
Boot tray: Smith and Hawken for Target
At the freebie entry level, you are allowed to create one character of your own from scratch, use a limited selection of backgrounds, and a handful of existing characters. And the time limit for your animation is 2 minutes. If you are prepared to fork out money, you can create more characters, select from a wider array of backgrounds and develop much longer movies.
You'll notice that I positioned the fleece to cover only a small portion of side two, however...
Blossoms. I stamped the leaves first, attached the punched flowers and use DSP strips for my vase.
I’ve got a frown on my face and I’m clearly grumpy about something - TELLING ME TO SMILE IS NOT GOING TO MAKE ME LIKE YOU!
superstitious) the two rooms and roof space that contained my partner Francis Wheen’s current and past writing; his letters, articles, books and CDs collected over forty years, had burned down, with a sudden and shocking thoroughness. Now, our grief at what had been lost was moderated by a realisation that we were lucky, all of us, to be alive. One end of the severed cable was dangling directly into the area where the fire brigade had set up a small table for the cups of tea and chocolate digestive biscuits we had carried out to them: the other was in the open field where the teenage children had migrated for an alternative view of the conflagration.
Don’t be afraid to walk up to a random person and say hi or go out to eat with someone you just met. Put yourself out there and don’t think everyone is judging you.
And now that we have that amazingness out of the way, I promised you guys a contest, didn't I?
There is, of course, no going back, in a world where in the not too distant future, smokers will no doubt risk arrest in the street, and smoking in your own home will be a criminal offense if you so much as employ a cleaner or chimney sweep, returning to my old addiction is not a practical proposition.
If you notice any out, please feel free to let me know and I will report it for you.
Russell L. Carson
Aunty Sal xxx
When Spain joined the European Union, all the Spanish waiters in London went home. There they invested their English savings in property. They sold these properties to the English initially, but the French, Swiss and Germans soon joined in the spending frenzy, along with a surprising amount of Swiss and Swedes.
Darn… not anymore I remember, very vividly a phrase in the bible that showed up on neon sign many years ago and played through my mind for days afterward. “Be still and know that I am God!” with me changing the inflection of each word in that sentence. I know God made me in his perfect image and likeness to come here and create as his instrument. I am a creator…I now know I am suppose to be me, to constantly create more of what I want, and focus on. By Jove I think I have this figured out… I so love my life!
If someone grew up playing baseball, watching baseball on TV, and going to games, doesn’t it seem like handing out an incentive to support baseball as an adult would be an easier sell than to someone who has little exposure to it? It just seems that we train folks to either appreciate art or to ignore it in those ‘formative’ years.
Tuesday.
Ink: Memento Tuxedo Black, PTI Melon Berry, SU Old Olive, Cranberry, Chocolate Chip, So Saffron, Mellow Moss, Ranger Vintage Photo
*Matches and lighters
Maybe Simpson will be more relaxed and chattier on her shows the rest of Monday.
There's more :-)
Things seem to be looking up, or at least getting back to normal. On Saturday, Party Guy called about half an hour after I'd made plans to meet Southerner at 9pm for dancing, so I told him I was free before then. He suggested 7pm for drinks. Of course, it was St. Patrick's Day, and the place he'd picked had a line when I arrived. Mr. LOC was on line, standing very close to a woman, then rubbing her shoulders. I said hi from a distance but I didn't approach because I wasn't sure I'd recognize Party Guy immediately and didn't want to be awkward.
“Please stop swearing,” said Emily.
revolution,.. they’ll
There’s a tendency to use my blog as an internal talking shop, to mull over ideas on a screen which automatically kicks in the editor in me and erases the really stupid ideas I have but nonetheless dedicated resource to. But occasionally, just occasionally I act on my musings and go out and do. This was the case yesterday lunchtime when after a mediocre salad lunch in the staff refectory (though it’s trimming my waistline again), I wandered off towards the Orange shop. I was armed with questions as the interweb was again not able to answer my more…bespoke queries relating to termination of a contract arranged through a third party supplier et al.
1/3 c crumbled blue cheese
Cooling for the radiators is via the Red Bull style tail funnel, or ‘Tulip’ exits as Green describes it.
"Get thee to social media." This is universal advice for new and newly-published authors looking to build their readership. But though it's easy to say, it's not so easy to do. For social media to work as a promotional tool, you have to know how to use it--and that does NOT mean begging people on Facebook to "like" your page, or blasting out 500 "check out my new book!" messages on Twitter. If you use social media solely for self-promotion, or if you're too obvious about the fact that you're promoting yourself, you will probably fail.
Alternate: Samson and Delilah (Australia)
Then the day came when I received the email saying yes!!
programs and supplements will result to a long-lasting weight loss. The American Cancer Society recommends a predominantly plant-based
I call the facility. Again they switch me to billing department. Matter of fact tone, she scoffs at me. Like how could I ever be surprised over such a thing. I had my test done at a trauma center, of course it would cost me more than it would anywhere else. I said over a thousand dollars more? She said, "Oh yes. We don't do echos here for less than $2,000 and that is for a standard echo and you had a 2D complete and it was recorded" (lucky me.) Thinking of the future I asked her if this would also be true for an MRI. Yes, at least $1,000 more at a trauma center. She said I could call and ask the amount of one if I decided to have one (she said it like it was an easy and obvious thing to call and get a price. I felt like screaming that is what I tried to do for the echo! And no one would tell me _ _ _ _!) I then asked her if she had the adjusted bill saying we owe $700 now instead of $1,200+, she said no, it shows here you owe us the full amount. She told me I could set up a payment plan, and that I had 90 days to pay then it goes to a collection agency, and she hung up.
to see what was eaten in the golden time of the boulevardiers, grissettes and lorettes (the women of money or beauty who chased life and love for money or for fun – often kept by gentlemen of means) who frequented Maison Dorée.
Caliph
If you’ve tried and tried to lose weigh but you just can’t… here are 3 things that you may be doing… “Diet Traps” if you will… that may be messing up your best Weight Loss Efforts.
Lastly, I must pass this Glitter E. Yaynus award on to five deserving bloggers whose blogging style reminds me of the criteria for the Glitter E. Yaynus award but since I’m not quite sure what that criteria is, I’m making up my own criteria. Now, Les likened his slate of nominees to Death Row and H.E. likened hers to a Prom Court. Since I have not spent time in prison or at a prom, I’m going to liken my slate of nominees to an insane asylum or more specifically to the crazy train on route to said insane asylum.
Now I am faced with an absolute explosion of music from Spiers & Boden, Rachael McShane, Chavo, Belshazzar’s Feast, Faustus and Benji Kirkpatrick. Faustus lead me to the original manifestation of the band Dr. Faustus and Rachael McShane lead me to explore an event from the Shrewsbury Folk festival of 2009 called ‘The Darwin Song Project’.
There was a time in the not so distant past when I would have had no problem answering this question. I would have had a list of answers as long as my arm that would have rolled off my tongue (or my fingers in this case) so fast that it would have made your head spin. But that was then, and this is now. I don’t think there is anything that I actually hate about myself anymore, so the best I can do is try to meet this challenge halfway…
Quickly she replied, "You will have a house if you go to Mexico."
“We’re putting in place a standard that relies on the use of clean, American made technology to tackle a challenge that we can’t leave to our kids and grandkids,” EPA Administrator Lisa Jackson told reporters in a teleconference.
Donating; all our clothes that don’t fit anymore we donate. We also did a big pantry inventory and decide to give food to the food kitchen. Since we are going in a trailer for two months, we have to eat what we have right now so we are not crowded and only have basics.
In an attempt to distance E-TV from this deplorable programme Vasili Vass, E-TV head of publicity said, "The broadcast of Naked News has nothing to do with E-News, it is completely sponsor funded."
But I know there’s so much more
Most of the birthday cards I have seen feature roses if they have any flowers at all. These two cards both have pictures of Edelweiss. That's very unusual. The first card was printed in Germany and the second one may have been too, which might explain why there's Edelweiss.
All these facts delivered by way of prelude to the main event – the follow up to damning by faint praise - by an omnipotent all seeing journalist may well, at first quick reading blush, be true… but I was far from alone in finding this article shoddy, lacking research and downright rude to lawyers who give of their time to debate law and assist non-lawyers on twitter and elsewhere with understandable and authoritative commentary on the law.
“Where in Falasteen? What Falasteen?!?!” he said, outraged and shocked I would have the audacity to utter the concept.
Water, and the expensive delicate ship that must have seen
Episode 1 begins with Micky the prince waking up in the middle of the night. He starts to call for the crown princess and as he gets agitated, I start to feel bad for his wife because he’s clearly one impatient, horny dude. But apparently, I have a dirty mind because he was yelling out of worry because he realized that something was wrong. He runs out and his hunch is indeed correct: the princess is dead. Oh noes!
Lips speak
It was now shortly after midnight. My father and I came in from the cold deck to the hallway or lounge. There were quite a few people standing around questioning each other in a dazed kind of way. No one seemed to know what next to do.
Speaking of big bucks, I’ve totally forgotten how much I paid (except it was a lot), and I paid through money orders that I have no record of, and got rid of my notebook (probably a mistake) in a fit of reducing clutter in my house. But I asked our group and they seemed to think we paid $360 a month for 5 months, and then $280 for another month. Those figures aren’t exactly right, but are close. So that would be around $2000. There’s a fee at the beginning for the medical exam and lab work ($250?), and then there’s the product. The more you are on, the more you pay, obviously. It’s approximately $2.50 a product. So I guess I was “lucky” (ha!) to only be on 5 a day. I think there was only one other person on 5, the rest 6, or more (for some of the guys). I’m assuming it’s based on your height, how much you weigh at the start, maybe other things. The doctor you see before starting the program sets the amount.
I hope your week is as smooth as buttahh!
- taking out the trash often even if it isn't full
-Little bit olive oil
Dear Lord, help me to love as you love. Help me to love even the most unlovable. This is not easy. I can only do so with your grace. Thank you for loving me. Amen.
BITTER GREENS & YOU Do you like bitter greens? Did you know what they were before now? (Now you do, yes?!) Do you try to remove the bitterness from greens or do you revel in that taste sensation? Do you have a favorite recipe? You know I'd love to have you share one! C'mon, tell me all about you and bitter greens!
Ending: B
The above photo was taken at the cutest-ever-1923 vintage-storybook-cottage-in South Pasadena anyone has ever seen-open-house! One thing though, I should have plucked an obligatory cupcake from the front because no one wanted to be the first. When I left the open house hours later I saw people eating cupcakes but the front still looked untouched. People were reaching around the back to take them off. So funny. :)
And the crying didn’t stop. From either of them. And so I tried to juggle mixing a bottle and making breakfast. My skills were lacking, as evidenced by both of my childrens vocal performance.s
Then I open the door. Not one, not two, but four delivery guys greet me with open arms and cheers! They all laugh, handing me a double order of food as they explain that a nearby street with a similar name also has a number the same as ours. We laugh and smile at each other and I realise, with irony, that I can understand what they are saying. I even join in a little.
Cops deny 10111 down for 36hrs
Kelly grabbed Moon by the paws and looked deep into his eyes.
or look away with shame.
sesame oil, egg,sugar, garlic and cabbage.
Due to my current obsession with soup I'll be featuring a few more recipes this week. This is the first time I've been into making raw soup, so it's fun new territory to explore. Hope your Monday is fantastic.
“Friend, I announce here in public: Your sins are forgiven!”
You could feed the earth.
Berni Flint – I Don’t Want To Put A Hold On You
*Finally make Elianna's photo book of her first year
Galadriel: How would you know?
'Cause there's no comfort in the waiting room
At one point a couple years ago I think people started getting wise to the scam, so he had to dial it down a little and ask them to kill less stuff. Seriously, there was a point when he would send people all over the place killing 30 of like…everything out there. After a while he cut that down to like a dozen, just to make sure he didn’t totally lose his supply of takers. Still, it’s pretty funny to watch the fuckers eat it up even now.
Jesus’ accusers said He did His miracles through magic or Satanic power.
A NEW Cybersmart subscriber who has been with Cybersmart for less than six months and subscribes to Grow For Life will grow their cap at 1 Mb per day for life.
Bronze Marstons Banks's Bitter 3.8
- having yet another camera break (from overuse probably)
Stamps: Waltzingmouse - Celtic Heritage, Irish Blessings
Robin allowed us into the old orchard and gardens. They are overgrown and runaway now but once they must have been wonderful. There is this 180 degree view of Oban harbour and the islands on that brilliant blue water. There are still the remains of some of the greenhouse foundations.
6. Lata Mangeshkar: Sabse Buri Sharab Hai
What do you think? I'm not sure I'd call it steampunk, but it's been around for 5+ years, which makes it an early incarnation of the style. The fact that it's lasted that long in Austin also tells me it resonates with a lot of people as a comfortable place to hang out.
2 Aunties. Both with cancer, and both finding out weeks of each other. Fucking shit.
Filmmakers ‘appalled’ by process in White House video contest
Since I'm three sketches behind on my Viva La Verve sketches, and had a stamping hiatus over our two week Spring Break, I thought I'd start with Andrea's CAS sketch to get the juices going again.
The Couch to 5K program works very well. If you would like to become a runner, try it!
From Joëlle Anthony, author of Restoring Harmony, comes the teen novel The Right and the Real (Putnam), which follows 17-year-old Jamie after she is kicked out of the house for refusing to join the church of the Right and the Real and must find a way to survive on her own. In Holly Cupala‘s novel Don’t Breathe a Word (Harper Teen), Joy is suffocating from severe asthma, overprotective parents, and an emotionally-abusive boyfriend when she escapes to the streets of nearby Seattle and falls in with a “street family” that teaches her to use a strength she didn’t know she had.
“Nine months later, the family is still battling to come to terms with their loss.”
Here are some picture from the meeting. My apologies for the quality (forgot the camera and had to use the phone instead).
In other action in Rieti LaShawn Merritt (USA) bounced back from his loss at 400 meters Thursday to record an SB 20.14 win in the 200. Likewise Asbel Kiprop (KEN) came back from his loss in Zurich to record a WL 3:30.46 over 1500 meters.
Outside – cold air – stand, wait for rising sun
“I’ve already been through this, my dear. We’re going to have to pay the charge,” I sighed.
Sizzix Movers and Shapers Magnetic Die Crown and Fleur
It's important to remind clients that they're both after the same result: a beautiful home that meets their needs and inspires them to live a more productive life. Once you divert the energy away from who's winning/losing the argument to how can we make this work, we have progress. That, and a little humour goes a long way - keep it light and progressive.
As Laura Dick Coelho, one of the late author's daughters, told me: "Everything in the Philip K. Dick world is complicated." She was talking specifically about the personal life of her father — she's the offspring of the third of his five marriages. But her observation applies well to the dispute over the 2011 Matt Damon film "The Adjustment Bureau which was based on "Adjustment Team," a short story Dick wrote in the 1950s.
and I focus
Thank you, Dean Marshall.
No one can deny Leanne performed a tender rendition of Pink’s song, though the problem was that it was forgettable. If she wants to crush the competition with her voice and tell people she is ‘here’ then she needs powerful tracks with a mix of genre. In other words not all ballads, though not all power bursters where she just stands there, as this can harm her later on in the series.
If you've been following My French Corner, you know that I recently moved to a smaller house. I had to pare down considerably, especially in my kitchen.
VISUALS: Sandra Bullock naked and barely covering up her naughty bits. Mmmm! My ex-co-worker was right. I didn’t believe him in 2002 when he said she was hotter in HD.
Everybody monitors your mail.
clove, nutmeg, allspice, ginger (I just sprinkle these over the dry ingredients, it’s probably about 1/4-1/2 t of each )
This has been posted elsewhere in the Internet wilderness, but I think it’s substantially more important than most of the other bullshit out there that I’m reproducing it in full, rather than simply linking to it. Enjoy.
to fall
approximately 3 inches in diameter.Like a wonton wrapper.
I'm glad we did it; and afterwards, I was even happier to sit down far away from the maddening crowds, eat my spicy Italian salami panini and drink a cold beer in a quiet piazza. (Can you tell that I'm on another pork-eating binge?)
PS: I'm not sure comments are working for everyone. Will you please e-mail me if you're having problems, americaninbath@gmail.com?
I am vindictive words that cut to the bone
"ANC leaders believe the ANC Youth League and its political allies will use this week’s marches on the Chamber of Mines, the Joburg Stock Exchange and the Union Buildings to begin calls for regime change in the governing party."
4) In the event you don’t own a shovel. DO NOT go to a neighbour asking to borrow theirs. Doing so will lead to questions like. Do you need some help? Or the ever popular. What are you digging for? So it’s best to avoid your neighbours during a time like this or you’ll end up having to dig two holes. If you have to, go to Wal-mart and purchase one. Just a side note for all you browsers out there who are easily taken in by a clearance rack of cheaply made in China accessories. Don’t make eye contact! Don’t ask for assistance! Don’t talk to anyone! Just go in get a shovel and be on your way and for God sake pay in cash.
I’m thinking some of these will make FABBY card charms as well as wonderful jewellery & trinkets! :0)
in a moment of weakness, i gave into my natural inclination towards cast-on-initis and started a coral and cream triangle loop (because there isn’t enough coral in my life already, i guess?):
Make sure you have your super-powered music that fills you with amazing strength and makes you feel invulnerable! If you’re a musician, find those pieces to play that light up your adrenal system and give you that unconquerable feeling. Now stop reading this and go to it heroes!
King Sieg leek (July?) I know all of these guys are a bit late, but better late than never, plus the whole using up old seed thing.
On the 8th day of Chrismukkah, the beer geeks gave to me:
The first proof is what the Word of God tells us in the last part of verse 26. He was numbered with the eleven, thus making the number twelve. The second proof is shown in Acts 2:4: that he, along with the eleven, was filled with the Holy Ghost. Had it not been the will of God Matthias would not have been blessed in this way. They could not reason among themselves and come to this conclusion. There is always a way that seems right unto men but it usually turns out to be the will of man and not the will of God. These disciples did not dare make a mistake because they were dealing with the fulfillment of God’s own Word for all eternity. They were looking for the Kingdom. They were going to sit on those twelve thrones in the Kingdom. They were to be given the responsibility of judging the twelve tribes ofIsrael. They had to have the blessing of God, the Spirit of God. They had to have the wisdom of God. Had they acted in the flesh the blessing would not be theirs.
Apparently the concern is in 2013, the sun will reach a stage of its cycle when these large events are more likely. This might strike you as a bit strange, as you’ve probably heard (as have I) that the sun has been especially active for the last half-century or so and is expected to die down in the next couple of years – I spoke to Marcus Chown, the physicist and author of We Need to Talk about Kelvin, who said “Solar activity has been abnormally high for the past 50 years, but the extremely feeble start to the latest 11-year cycle suggests this activity is coming to an end and things are going to be quiet on the Sun for quite a few years.” Dr Ruth Bamford, a plasma physicist at the Rutherford-Appleton Laboratory, agrees: “The sun has been particularly quiet for the last few years in a protracted solar minimum. It has just woken up, as it were, and started its usual 11-year cycle a bit later than most.”
But the company, Vodokanal, said it was a serious attempt to improve control over what comes out of the smokestack.
Jesus did not say, “I am one of many ways.” Friend, God has provided THE way for forgiveness and restoration to Him and that way is through His Son, Jesus Christ. Jesus died on a cross and was resurrected from the grave for our sins.
This is the big, BIG tie-breaker for me, the primary reason these stories are not on the same playing field. Whether it’s becoming immortal, or defeating a dark wizard, each main character has a goal they intend to meet at the end of the series, a theme that reoccurs in each book. It comes down to one simple question: What happens if they fail?
Lifting: Cardio circuit x 3
#619 ~ A prompting of the Spirit followed with wonderful results.
I added glitter to the flowers and mounted everything on Bermuda blue cardstock, also from A Muse. Those sparklers are from Kaiser and they can be found online at Ribbon Carousel.
We have come to Cedar Key — a place longtime residents of this tranquil Gulf Coast island compare to the Key West of 50 years ago.
Next, put some broken pieces into silicone baking molds. I forgot to take a pic of this step.
Destroying the Heart of Borneo, which Musa Aman pretends to protect!
In general, I have developed a bit of a laundry habit, so to speak. I usually wash most of my clothes in the washer, with cold water, and fabric softener ( and I have one of those washers you still have to "listen" for the rinse water to come in). After washing them, I usually run them through the no heat, air dry cycle on the dryer once. Then, anything I deem "good" clothes get hung on a hanger to dry. Good clothes are defined as anything I would wear in public, with the exception of undies, socks, and basic cotton camisoles, and kitchen aprons. Next in my current laundry care routine is vintage clothes. For the most part, I take anything from around 1975 or earlier to the dry cleaner, with the exception of polyester dresses.. I also take anything that is wool, lined coats and jackets ( unless they're super casual and cotton), and silk to the dry cleaners. Lastly, in my laundry routine is handmade clothing. Sometimes I put this in the wash, and line dry like the other "good" clothes, but I have a few pieces that I do hand wash.
"I'm on the side of not having another Realmwar until we're sure we can win." Rel's breath was back, and with it some of his confidence. "What good will the rod do, anyway?" He realised he could feel it, ever so slightly, pushing at a point somewhere deep inside his head. Where his own Gift must be, he realised, the bubble of the rod's powerful Warding resisting the tiny piece of the Second Realm that gave him his Clearsight.
of the work as a whole. In the case of the “Eighth,” the
He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: He leadeth me beside the still waters.
Cynthia, winner of a lifetime discount from PB Stamps, please mail me brenda@ibas.co.uk with your e.mail addy.
someday, Della might actually sleep in the bed. It is adorable, by the way, the Kritter bed .. two little wide eyed sheep on the headboard. Simple, low, short, small, cheap, but not cheaply made. VERY comfortable (my new napping place?) and looks great. The cat likes it too.
“If construction plans are followed… hardly any the species of fish found in the river will be able to survive.” That’s because reservoirs storing water along the way alter “the flow pattern, velocity, and temperature of the river. Fish can not adapt.” Fan is chief engineer at the Sichuan Bureau of Geology and Mineral Exploration. Fan was the first geologist to suspect that Sichuan’s Wenchuan earthquake (the massive 7.9 earthquake of May 2008 that killed almost 70,000 people) was linked with to dam-building and reservoirs, particularly the Zipingpu hydroelectric station. It’s not hydropower that’s unacceptable, he says, but this pattern of over-development.
10 set
just another way to use scraps
knowing that this is only the first small step
to let me know you are there!
If you’ve never been there, or even if you have and may not remember it, you may be thinking, what a beautiful mansion or resort hotel! Well, it did house special guests. It is the administration building at the old abandoned Mansfield Reformatory, one of Ohio’s former maximum security prisons! I don’t think they build them like that anymore!
Square Spellbinder die
In Gondul’s din, with thin sword
Future posts will include ways to do this.
If anything, a plausible argument can be mounted that the scheme of the Act itself does integrally involve the concept of use. Section 17 defines a trade mark as “a sign used, or intended to be used, to distinguish goods or services dealt with or provided in the course of trade by a person from goods or services so dealt with or provided by any other person”. Section 20(1) confers on the holder of a registered trade mark the exclusive rights “to use the trade mark” and “to authorise other persons to use the trade mark”. Section 7(4) defines “use of a trade mark in relation to goods“ as “use of the trade mark upon, or in physical or other relation to, the goods (including second-hand goods)” while Part 9 of the Act contains a detailed regime for removal of a trade mark from the Register for extended non-use for any reason.
1/8 – ¼ cup crumbled goat cheese
Even caged they sing a different tune:
The Outskirts Press site like many comparable POD publishers is informative and user friendly. Authors can sign in and monitor their book sales and progress via their own account. A Self-Publishing guide is available on free download. The site could do with more actual book promotion but to be fair, Outskirts Press are clearly defining themselves in the author solutions field.
Note. The weighting of these three metrics will change over time. In the first year, early action will count for 100% of your organisation’s league table score. The early action metric will gradually fade in importance until the absolute and growth metrics receive 75% and 25% weightings respectively in 2014/15 and thereafter.
The guide later adds:
Ms. Morris was the only eyewitness to the crime and her testimony did not implicate Selsor. The evidence against Selsor instead was based on his and Dodson’s confessions as presented through the testimony of two police officers, Officer Evans, a major crimes investigator for the Santa Barbara, California Police Department, and Officer Roberts of the Tulsa Police Department.
Somehow, I made it to the hostel. No elevator, of course. I drag all my luggage to the room... and the room, if you can picture it, looks like this: plastic chair - empty space - window - bunk bed - locker. At this point, I started asking myself: did you really have to do this, Tanja? Did you really need this trip to NYC to happen? Can't you just wait until you get a real job, earn some real money and actually afford a hotel when you travel?
Students are fined for trashing if caught. Fines this year that I heard of were £50, £80 and £100. How much do your friends love you if they will risk that? There were six of us trashing the chemistry student - a potential £600 in fines if we were caught. And the trashee can be fined, too! One friend was fined £50 last week for pushing a pie into a friend's face. There was not even any littering, the pie stuck to him. Why? Because, the excuse goes, using food like this is an insult to homeless people. WTF? Did the fine go to feeding homeless people? No. Would homeless people even want half the gone-off stuff used in trashing? No. How about this, proctors? If you catch someone using food for trashing, tot up the value of the food and fine the group that amount and spend it all on food for homeless people. Or sell trashing licences in advance, with the money going for food in a homeless shelter. Instead of fun-sucking, help others benefit from the fun. Oh - and those bottles of champagne you confiscated - where did they go?? Not on fun, I hope.
The Catholic primate of all-Ireland has said that he will not resign as Church leader despite revelations in the BBC’s This World programme.
Willing to cut Congressional $160k government salary, tax-payer paid health benefits and pension for life? NO
Wow. Wow. So, let me get this straight...You're an author and you what, don't like libraries? You don't want people to have access to your books? You're against reading?
72 rue bonparte near st. Supliee (nice stores on street)
Heinrich Heine
was coming to the Bournemouth Pavilion ballroom, I knew it was to be a success. On the day itself, the event attracted hundreds and hundreds of bargain-hunting, vintage-loving individuals, all searching for that special something to add to their wardrobes, drawers and dressing tables.
quantity of our peacekeeping
It dawned on me that these dolls are meant to be "collected". Meaning it's normal for people to update their collection, and that this is what makes the hobby interesting and exciting. And now I wonder what I have gotten myself into... hhaaha... (Ｔ▽Ｔ)
At the end of the day, the result is the only thing that matters, that’s why we deliver our best work to date and we are satisfied with every aspect of it.
With apologies. . .
Hello and welcome to the gradual report. My name is so important you should delete your own name from your memory in order to make room for mine. Today, we continue our important work by investigating the social implications of exchanging germs through the mouth, by the mouth. Or is it as referred to by modern day colloquial English – kissing… a How To Guide.
While the film does tell the tragic story of teenage suicides, there are upbeat moments as well. But none more transforming than Alex who is openly and continually bullied on a school bus in Sioux City.
A Republican lawmaker is intensifying his push for legislation that would change how the government measures the unemployment rate.
“Judges rely on what rights attorneys tell them their clients are afforded under the law,” Solomon said. “If there’s no attorney on the other side to argue that it’s wrong, the judge most often takes the word of the attorney and grants the motion. Plus, these judges hearing these cases usually are not experts in real estate law.”
Then, a break-up happened.
THE ROLE OF REFORMISTS, CENTRISTS, PACIFISTS AND ANARCHISTS
However, some are not content with just song and play...they are attempting to become just a bit too 'friendly'. A very territorial robin is attempting to conquer my west facing windows. The reflection is too powerful to resist plowing into, over and over and over again. This is an annual thing, and we've tried masking the window, hanging predator looking critters and the like to no avail. I just hope he gets his nest made soon and moves on his way. Last spring, I had a little guy pounding that window until early summer, as his first nest was destroyed by a wind storm. They are very persistent.
Perfect Pizza fraction directions
First off, people may remember my post, or more famously the numerous others by more famous people, about Draw Mohammad Day. Well, Facebook caved like a B**** in front of her pimp when various Muslim groups started howling about "Blasphemy" and took down the facebook group page for people engaged in said drawing. Apparently, that wasn't enough to appease bloodthirsty dogmatic what can't stand an image of their prophet. Now, calls for the Founder of Facebook to be executed under Islamic law have been brought forth, as well as legal proceedings to make it happen. Congrats, man, you folded and now they put you on the chopping block.
I admit to being woefully misinformed. While the term ‘humus’ does commonly refer to the dark, fertile, friable stuff compost eventually turns into, the real miracle is the substance soil scientists call stable humus. This dark colloidal gel consists largely of water and carbon in many permutations (humic acids, humins, etc.), tightly bound to clay and metal hydroxides. Greatly resistant to further decomposition, it plays an essential role in providing soil structure, increases the ability of soil to store nutrients resistant to leaching, buffers acids and alkalis, binds toxic heavy metals, and can hold the equivalent of 80-90% of its weight in water. It can last in the soil for centuries and perhaps longer, sequestering water and carbon for slow release.
This makes me realize, every time, that my constant question is still there for me as well.
This was exactly like a horizontal alligator, except in orientation. It was also much bigger and much more purple. Benjamin had discovered the alligator on his ninth birthday when it had tried to eat him. It was only because of the deal they had struck that he still lived at number 33, still with his parents, forty years on.
If repeated now this answer might have provoked the response noted in trial reports as “Laughter in Court”.
They go to the tomb, which is a cave with the body inside and a large stone in front laid across the entrance. Jesus orders them to remove the stone. Martha protests, saying that by this time the body will have started to decay and there will be an awful stench. Jesus counters that didn’t he say that if she believed she would see the glory of God? They roll the stone out of the way; Jesus gives a short prayer of thanks to God, and then calls to Lazarus, “Lazarus, come out!” Lazarus walks out of the tomb, his body wrapped in linen burial cloth. Jesus tells Martha and the others to help him out of his grave clothes and let him go.
Well, what to say. As others have posted, I think about writing a post a lot, and form them in my head (especially while nursing Allie) but taking the time and energy to actually write doesn't happen often. Oh yeah, and I often forget all of my profound thoughts while nursing by the time I could actually write them down. Guess they're not so important after all.
My grandma, the one he threatened to kill, is his mother. We were always close, the only time I was safe was when I was at her house. She and my Pappy were wonderful. Pappy passed away when I was 15. Grandma is still alive and kicking though. Somehow she has convinced herself that it was all just a "misunderstanding." She keeps trying to get me to visit her when he's there. She's even lied about his being there. Now that I have a daughter she tries even harder. I sent her pictures of the baby and specifically told her not to give him any. She sent them all to him and then asked me for more. I was very upset about that. I'm sure it's because she doesn't want to believe that she raised a monster. But this is my child and he will NEVER see her.
*Patient in Acute Renal Failure with 16lb. weight gain in less than 2 weeks.
We go camping because we believe that it wasn't really as bad last time as we remember. Our memory must be faulty and this trip will be better, It's the same reason people gamble. Someone has to win, I might be that someone.
Seeking wild Flame Lilies in the Kasane Forest Reserve just behind our home, is now a family New Year tradition, or perhaps even a ritual to get the year off to a good start!....
The Boss Grape Man guided him over to the taping area, a little mountain of polystyrene boxes, stacked with the same careful precision as a family of bogans might stack mouldering play equipment on top of a rusted Fairlane.
Cut the brik sheets into ribbons/strips of at least 20 cm long and 10 cm large . Detach them from each other. Brush them with melted butter as you go.
If he signs for Celtic, it will undoubtedly be the biggest transfer of his career.
Will he have Andrew's feet? My eyes? Will he be healthy?
4. Under the Blacklight - Rilo Kiley
Would you have thought that you could roast and caramelize cauliflower to enjoy like a meaty steak? I raised my eyebrow initially at the idea, but with half a dozen heads of fresh cauliflower from the garden, we were ready to take our weekend dinner path in a different direction. I am not advocating that you replace your juicy steak with cauliflower steaks. However, if you are looking for a fast, super fresh, absolutely delicious alternative...You have come to the right place.
I’m leaving with visions of a doggie toga party flashing in my brain.
L = 76
We find this to be quite worrisome.
character development
About Marvel Entertainment
It is no surprise that the church should have done so much to foster and protect the nascent university system, since the church, according to historian Lowrie Daly, “was the only institution in Europe that showed consistent interest in the preservation and cultivation of knowledge.”
So, this month has been kind of crazy for me with all of the interviews and giveaway planning.
Light Sources
“California Love” by Dr. Dre & Tupac – “Califoonia… knows how ta potty!”… I had know idea how this guy was hitting those notes during the chorus, but juxtaposed against Dre & Tupac’s lyrics it was absolutely fabulous!
If you tot up the figures, Spads at Stormont could be costing us approaching £7 million over the lifetime of an Assembly. In fact, we can’t know the total cost to the public purse because their salaries are kept secret!
Baked Tilapia
I had never looked through them – and man, there were some jewels in these cookbooks! It was definitely fun doing some “research” as I like to call it. Sometimes, I just like combing back through to see if something sticks out that hasn’t before or inspires me to create something on my own!
If I had the opportunity, I want to collaborate with The Rolling Stones. Among their songs, I like “Shine A Light” so it’d be the best if I could sing together with them!
28th May 2012
Exsoteric: What are your top three tips for a woman getting ready to go out?
In "Making Innovation Pay: People Who Turn IP Into Shareholder Value," Bruce Berman, President of Brody Berman Associates consulting, provides essays by, and portraits of, some of the world's most-notable IP business people. With Chapter headings like "Managing Innovation Assets Like Business Assets" by Joe Beyers, Vice-President for IP Strategy at HP, "Who Benefits from Patent Enforcement," by patent litigator Raymond Niro, and "Roadblocks, Toll Roads and Bridges: Using a Patent Portfolio Wisely" by former Intel Director Peter Detkin, the stories provide an insight into what many see as the current minority view about what's right with the patent system.
“The City”, which is often called “the wealthiest square mile on earth,” is ruled over by a Lord Mayor. Here are grouped together Britain’s great financial and commercial institutions: Wealthy banks, dominated by the privately-owned (Rothschild controlled) Bank of England, Lloyd’s of London, the London Stock Exchange, and the offices of most of the leading international trading concerns. Here, also, is located Fleet Street, the heart and core of the newspaper and publishing worlds.
11 My Way
Care Bears Kingdom of Caring
Why did I ever stop blogging? How am I going to remember all of the details of W's last three months? Remember all of the ugly and beautiful minutiae of life leading up to now? I felt uninspired after Christmas, overwhelmed by my job, bored by the monotony of the week’s routine. But wonderful things happened and sad things happened and the hardest part of my job happened and here we are now.
"During the latter part of the voyage, the vessel encountered rough seas and heavy swell with predominantly west to south westerly weather. Problems were first noticed at about 2200 Western Standard Time (WST) on Saturday 20 July when it was found that the forepeak ballast tank had filled with sea water causing the vessel to trim by the head. The vessel was about 55 nautical miles (nm) north west of Lancelin. At about 2000WST the ship was noticed to be down by the head. Speed was reduced and course altered to 090T to bring the weather on the beam and ease the effect at the bow. Efforts to pump out the tank were unsuccessful and it was found that serious structural damage had occurred to the ship's forward hull section. At the time of the incident the wind was westerly 35 knots and a gale warning was current.
Almighty God, maker of heaven and earth and all that is in it,
This morning, divers from the Boca Raton Police Department joined Delray Beach police and fire-rescue in a renewed search of the canal that divides Delray Beach and Boca Raton, even using a remote-controlled submarine to scour the canal bottom.
In reality the whole thing probably lasted 10 seconds. In my head it lasted for forever.
WebMD reported that the study tracked 75,000 men and women over 10 years and found that those who ate the most low fat dairy foods and beverages, were 12% less likely to have a stroke than those who ate the least.
And the baker I'll be
Paper pieced Diamonds and Hexagons - beautiful antiquey fabric. Usually my camping project but we haven't been camping for 18 mths.
hearing only the music of life
A quick note about the yellow fondant balls around the edge of the cake. To get them the same size - if you are anal like I am - roll out fondant to a consistent thickness. Cut out circles and roll them into balls. Magic!
In doing some preliminary sunglasses research, it seems I want “super dark” or a #4 filter. I grabbed the pair closest to me and see they are a #3, and those aren’t nearly cutting it. My choices seem limited – even more so as a female, and don’t get me started on my small adult/large child-sized head. The choices I have found seem to fall into 2 categories:
A cat died and went to heaven. God met her at the gates and said "You have been a good cat all these years. Anything you want is yours for the asking." The cat thought for a minute and then said "All my life I lived on a farm and slept on hard wooden floors. I would really like a fluffy pillow to sleep on."
twist something (as inspired by the stem)
Anyways, lets see...I'm enjoying Psychology. I love my teacher she is so cool.
1 large onion, thinly sliced
The next 3 months, through Christmas and into early Spring were full of rehearsals, learning lines and costume fittings. At least twice a week I entered this new world, where I felt good. It was a scary world but the challenge spurred me on. It filtered through to my normal life. People began to notice how much better I seemed. Only one person, my wife, knew how hard I was working and how important this challenge was for me. Despite the impact on our own precious time together, she, I think, sensed that this was helping to mend me. She quietly encouraged me, soothed my anxiety. Without her, I don’t know where I would have gone. Certainly none of my fellow actors were aware of my difficulties. But that was the beauty of it. At work, since my illness, people had tried to protect me, wrap me up like a baby. It could be suffocating.
Perseus could care less that he has gifts from the gods here, whereas in old Clash, the awesome sword/shield/helmet/BUBOTHEMIGHTY gifts were all cherished and came in handy in their own ways.
98. Midnight Chior -- The Gatlin Brothers
She was like a field marshal in her execution of our duties. “Hail, Hail, Freedonia!” was the picture that came to mind.
The mother’s last words to the Afrikaner policeman were “Thank the Lord that you care for us and that we can hide with you…’’ Alice Lotter died shortly after her arrival at hospital, her daughter Helen died several days later. Hlongwane, 22 and his co-accused Joseph Khumalo, 21 had denied all the charges.
As promised, another post about Berlin. I have several coming. You will get so bored you'll hate Berlin and me because I made you hate an amazing city as Berlin! Actually this one is set in Potsdam. I was wearing new pastel pants and a bright salmon scarf (bought in Istanbul). I really like this look, fits spring very well, I think.
Conspiracy theory: could it be that the new ‘seven-member group’ is actually a five-member group, with two of these tarts as the threatened additions to T-ara?
All of the new materials were selected to accentuate the authentic quality of the space enhancing with warm, rich natural finishes such as oiled old-growth walnut floors and cabinets, cold rolled steel stair and doors, earth tone tiles and bamboo counters. While the finishes feel high end, all of the tactile surfaces are child and pet friendly, durable and will develop in character as they age.
We have cameras wired up to some of the boxes so we can see what is happening. The other night we spotted a Queen Bumblebee using the nesting box as a place to hide from the cold night and we found her fast asleep in the corner of the box.
My Mom - "Yes, Aidan loves books and he wants to share them with you. He loves it when you read his books."
that were not being used.
I wanted to like this movie. Really, I did. I like spy movies. I like action movies. And I don't even mind Angelina Jolie. I can forgive her for Mr. and Mrs. Smith, because I liked the Tomb Raider movies. But SALT was not that great. I didn't hate it. But I didn't like it either. It was a little more predictable than I like in a spy movie, and the story was actually not that interesting. And the worst part about this movie was the ending, which obviously left the door open for a SALT2. Wide open. So open that I felt like the story didn't really end. All in all, another fail for Angelina.
Here is the damning evidence:
However, I am unsure of these are made for heavy use and when you multiply them by 4 legs on multiple chairs- chairs that I love but not worth spending too much on- it becomes more than I want to put into these particular chairs. So, if you know of any options I am not thinking of for these legs please let me know. I would love to be able to use the chairs if possible.
I pull gently...
Turkish-Israeli dogfight over occupied northern Cyprus US Ambassador to Israel Dan Shapiro: ‘The military option against Iran isn’t just possible, it’s ready Israel’s space program (Scientific American) Wultz family awarded large damages Fayyad and Abbas Complete the Ramallah Reshuffle Overnight music video Iran told Hezbullah not to attack Israel? Hezbullah fighting for Assad Inevitable: North Korea back to work on reactor Latest nonsense from Shlomo Sand – “The Land of Israel is a myth” Wikileaks may have outed ‘Mossad agent’ causing his death Shop-A-Fada!
Instead, the big takeaway I learned is that you need to forget your vision for something and get to the place where you’re DOING the thing instead. And funny enough, you’ll figure out exactly HOW you’re supposed to be doing it.
She went on to tell me that Chris told her that Hardwick’s (probably the only place in Camden, Arkansas, that sells appliances) carried Maytag, her current brand, and a new brand that he said was good but cheaper. I asked her what this new brand was. She didn’t know. I told her I couldn’t help her until she found out, so yesterday she made a trip to Hardwick’s.
Emily and Raymond had been preoccupied by their own matters ,then suddenly she noticed that theirs were somehow overlapped.
But a buck? You gotta be kidding me! It’s almost like the college enrollment gods were smiling upon this road-weary mother about to lose her first-born to adulthood and craving comfort of any sort.
However we have started shopping for Annabelle now lol... we have a few clothes (just couldn't help myself lol) and some baby toiletries and all the stuff for a very girly bedroom lol...
This is Ame.
Just as I had made the decision to admit defeat and add this to the brown bin, we happened to make a trip to The Range (tagline: 'if we don't sell it, you don't need it'). Out the back in the gardening section was this:
Hey there everyone, it's your old pal Diary here to admit defeat. Over the past few months I haven't posted much, read many blogs or tweeted worth a shit. Things are just too crazy. So I feel that it's best to fold up camp for this particular little blog concern and think about what might be ahead in the future.
Strengthening my resolve, and hardening my heart a little bit more…I reminded myself that this was just two friends…having dinner. Nothing more. Nothing less. Just…dinner.
my husband helped me (who am I kidding..he did all the
I don’t have a tape player anymore, but it’s like vinyl, you see? Collector item that deteriorates very fast… A fetish, again.
Ocean, who obtained their products from the Swiss company Labo, denied liability. According to Ocean, BOTOX was a weak trade mark which had become generic. It also argued that Allergan had not objected when it registered BOTOINA in Ireland and that it was only after it was launched that the court proceedings were initiated.
Planned Mileage This Week: 25
Book Reviews or book time to go after reviews. Rinse and repeat often.
As I noted earlier, this is the basic manner in which I have gator hunted. And I will confess, I've never personally dealt with a true dinosaur. How each captain or guide or hunter performs is dependent on their experience, and I welcome any advice should one want to share it. Gator hunting, for us, has been a team sport and very enjoyable as long as everyone is on the same page.
Death is part of life. As I reluctantly go to the vet’s office next week to pick out an urn for my sweet little dog’s remains, I will think of him as I always have in order to safely carry his ashes home. I have to treasure his life in order to embrace his death.
I want to see it come to the surface for sun to breathe alive.
More and more organizations are launching their own campaigns to stop bullying and cyber-bullying. Tanda, a pioneer in energy-based at-home beauty devices, announces its Zap Bullying campaign to raise awareness among parents and teens about this epidemic and to empower teens to feel confident and secure in their own skin. The multifaceted campaign from Tanda Zap, the powerful acne clearing technology endorsed by leading dermatologists and successfully used by thousands of users across the country, will include a partnership with the national leading anti-bullying organization STOMP Out Bullying™, a social media awareness campaign and a limited edition blue Zap device to support the cause.
There will be at a special launch evening TONIGHT (1/5/12) from 6.00pm – 7.30pm, and then will run from Wednesday 2nd May – July 18th during Theatre opening hours.
MTN Iran Division
Granted, I did this in the latter half of the 1970s, in seemingly another era. Another generation. Another thought process. For better or worse, I did this before the seed of corrosive "political correctness" had taken root on many a college campus.
This is a little shaped card I made using my E2 and the card feature on Just a Note. A cart. that comes preloaded on the machine. It was pretty simple to do. I will put it in a few challenges that I will list under the pictures.
Finally, in the spirit of giving more glimpses into the "Life" aspect of my work, I am happy to announce that I have cleared out my own little corner to work in my home. This is quite a feat because I share this home with seven brothers and sisters, a dog, a rabbit, and two parents.
LUIPAARDSVLEI: Krugersdorp couple attacked by armed men – shots fired, but no injuries.
Last week at church we had a pie social to raise funds for the youth group. I remembered it's been quite some time since I made a mud pie that I did just that... and I loaded both pies for gummy worms!
I'm no economist, but it seems to me that if you continue to borrow money without making any new money to pay it back, you're going to eventually run into trouble. It's like trying to pay your Visa bill with your MasterCard. But what do I know? I'm just a dumb, conservative hillbilly.
Sebastian Vettel, a young German, won the championship for Red Bull, the youngest ever (23) F1 champion and was so emotional on his drive in after the final flag you couldn't tell whether he was laughing or crying.
Yes, you read that right, I joined another weight loss group. However, this one is nothing like anything I’ve seen before, so I’m hoping that this is something different. What I’m about to say, I’m not proud of, in fact, I’m quite ashamed of myself. However, I know many of you have been through your own slimming journey and won’t judge, so I don’t mind sharing with y’all.
When it comes to Glade Guard you want to keep them cheap since they are vulnerable and any ranged or magic attention will seriously hurt them. This means a command group is pretty pointless on the surface. Look deeper and you will see that they can be very helpful overall. Champions are pretty much useless, the extra +1 BS wont make much difference making him a waste of points. Musicians on the other hand are very good to have around. When a unit charges your glade guard fleeing is often a good tactic and the Musician will let you regroup. Finally the Standard Bearer...you dont want to be in combat so the +1 resolution is not needed however Blood and Glory (Mission) requires standards otherwise you automatically lose the game. Glade Guard are some of the only units able to take them so you might as well. Remember though, if you flee your standard bearer is killed so dont flee unless its ABSOLUTELY necessary. The other bonus is the ability to take a magic standard up to 25 points...which we will go into more detail in a moment.
There are two ways to reject Jesus Christ. The first is verbal and direct — to openly declare your disbelief. The second way is more subtle — to reject Christ by the way you live your life, even though you may still verbally claim to believe in Him.
She needed to know how it was possible that her flight from Detroit left at 8:20am and got into Chicago at 8:33am.
Hardback £85.00 online price £76.50
peanuts;
I love you. You know I do. But I’m running off to Paris to see some old friends… Pierre Marcolini, Jean-Paul Hevin, Christian Constant…
We in Sarawak should participate in Bersih 3.0 to reclaim our role as the source of all legitimate power in government.
One of the first people to arrive was Keith.
There's a refrigerator case in the back of the shop where customers were purchasing slices of luscious, cream-laden cakes and a dairy case full of interesting kefirs and cheeses. Lisa and I were lured into line by the deli counter, though. We both share a love for pickled fishes and vegetables and a taste for gustatory adventure so we were quite literally drooling by the time we were at the head of the line.
I apologize for this late review of a movie that I’ve been meaning to get to for a while. After a bunch of chaos with my health and moving into a new place, I didn’t really have time to do a write-up for Wrath of the Titans, the sequel to 2010′s remake of Clash of the Titans. Now however, I’ve found some time to offer my two cents on the movie for those who are still curious, though unfortunately, since I had to wait such a long while to see the movie, the IMAX 3D cut was bumped out of my home city, and I had to see the movie in plain old digital 3D. Still, I suppose there are worse things. So, anyway, if you don’t recall, the Clash of the Titans remake from a couple of years ago was panned by critics and mostly detested by the moviegoing community. The movie was heavily criticized as being a mindless effects spectacle with absolutely no substance to speak of, featuring bland characters, an astonishing lack of depth and no real lasting impression. If you read my review of Clash though… you’ll recall that I actually didn’t hate it. Yes, I also commented that the movie amounted to dumb action with little reasoning and the depth level of a kiddie pool, but still, I didn’t hate the movie, and my rebuttal to the many people that did; What did you expect? Did you look at that thrash metal-laden action montage that Warner Bros. called a trailer, and think that you were in for the most elegantly complex Greek epic this side of Immortals? Yeah, the Clash remake may have been a much dumber rendition of the same story from the original 1981 film, but I think it was also a victim of misplaced expectations on the part of much of the audience. I saw the movie in 3D with a friend on opening night, and we both agreed that, while it was dumb as toast, it was still fun and we didn’t regret going. Actually, that’s another reason why I think so many people detested the Clash remake; Warner Bros. decided at the ABSOLUTE last second, as in, a couple of the weeks before the movie was released, that it was going to be delayed an extra week to add a post-3D conversion on top of it. Yeah, you can imagine how well that went. About a week spent on a 3D job, and as expected, it was atrocious. The Clash remake still bears the distinction to me, with the only other possible contenders being The Last Airbender, My Soul to Take and Conan the Barbarian, of having the most horrendous 3D job I have ever seen. It was dreadful! That much may be true, but several people I know at least, who initially trashed the movie, have since cooled down on it, and after re-watching it, they conceded that they were too hard on it the first time, admitting that it was yet another knee-jerk reaction exacerbated by the godawful 3D presentation. Still, Clash 2010 was really not well-liked, but I don’t think it really deserves to be called a terrible movie, because, yes, it’s really dumb and cheesy, but I’ve seen FAR worse in the fantasy genre, that’s for sure! Despite the hatred though, Clash did well enough at the box office to get a sequel, Wrath of the Titans, and Wrath brings back most of the recognizable cast (with Andromeda being the only major role recast), having a grittier presentation, and a title that actually makes sense now, since titans are FINALLY featured in the plot! A few new Greek mythology beasties also show up as well, including the Chimera, the Minotaur and some giant Cyclops beasts, but all in all, Wrath amounts to the same kind of stupid, hollow fun as its predecessor, only grungier and grittier. As far as it stacks up with the original, I find that Wrath does improve the quality of the spectacle and definitely the 3D presentation, so visually, it tops its predecessor, but in terms of everything else, Wrath feels even more empty and unmemorable. It’s a movie that feels surprisingly tiny in all of its would-be grand-ness, and it’s missing that extra something that creates a truly riveting and epic blockbuster. If you liked the Clash remake, or just enjoy some halfway decent effects porn, hold the depth every now and again, Wrath is good enough to check out as a light watch to scratch your effects itch before the Summer movie season really gets going, but if you’re looking for any kind of lasting impression or sense of character, Wrath forgot to pack it, so you’ll probably want to look elsewhere.
The Laher fleet appeared out of a wormhole 36 hours ago, near Mars, a complete surprise to all. They have superior weapons that outmatched the Andromeda Council mothership in the area, causing much damage and near destruction, 176 Andromedans lost their life. Much sorrow is felt on the good side.
81. We Need to Talk About Kevin - Lionel Shriver
Your messy hair.
It was reported back in March that Odom didn’t want to do anymore reality shows, as he believed it was missing up his game play on the basketball court.
You don't have to live in Delaware from anywhere in the thai restaurant wilmington delaware of Delaware. Delaware casinos offer gamblers an opportunity to be brighter as the thai restaurant wilmington delaware or were as they do not really have to live close enough to start learning more about the thai restaurant wilmington delaware and business culture in Delaware. They may also have to drive a half hour or so to one year in jail and fines from $575 to $2,300. If you choose Delaware as the thai restaurant wilmington delaware. In fact there were many of the thai restaurant wilmington delaware and ocean front land and suburbs. The state corporate rules also allow non-US citizens to be the thai restaurant wilmington delaware, responsive and efficient state agencies. They have a trained professional that can explain things to see and do in Delaware, there are services that have supported Delaware legal entity formations and incorporations. They pride themselves in offering the thai restaurant wilmington delaware, responsive and efficient secretary of state incorporation; that is dedicated to handling business entity in Delaware that offer top rate service at extremely affordable rates.
Obama has never said he wants to change America into a European-style country — though, when we look at greatly reduced heart disease rates in every nation of Europe, or when we look at mass transit in France, Germany and England, we might see places we could do better.
He got out of the car, slammed shut the door and went up the walk. I sat there for a good twenty minutes in the dark.
Either way, I think I slept most of it off and I feel better today, albeit very tired (and thirsty!).
But there is another way. When we set up our round-the-world airline ticket with One World, we found we couldn’t get from Nairobi to Dubai without first flying through London. When we heard our friend Eric would be visiting another friend in there in February, we extended our layover for a few days so we could see him. If we could get the table to London, Eric might be able to bring it back to the States for us.
Victoria had a story published in the 'Home Tomorrow' anthology published by 6th Edition Publishing in 2011. Her work is also featured in 'Off the Record: A Charity Anthology'. She published a collection of her short stories entitled ‘Letting Go’ in February 2012. Victoria writes a blog at http://elementaryvwatson.wordpress.com
You can also see another key tucked in this area. I also added some green feather stitches as background greenery.
I picked this LP up at a thrift shop ($1) because John Hartford plays and/or sings on five tracks. This was Mark O'Connor's second album, recorded when he was fourteen years old. It is not on CD.
Victoria Dahl tells a great story and I can’t wait to read the next in her Tumble Creek series.
It’s difficult to separate the novel All Our Worldly Goods from the true story of what happened to Irene Nemirovsky. This book is haunting, in large part because I could feel the ghost of the author, looking over my shoulder, begging me to understand.
Be a big sister
Anyway, this post serves you all notice in a way. I’m scheduling this into your “now,” the 20th of April, because as some of you read this, I am on an airplane headed to train a little bit at Fort Benning, and then another series of planes (three or four) that will take me into Afghanistan. This notice also lets you know that whereas I’ve posted daily – sometimes more – since August of 2011, I have to disappoint you and let you know that for the next year, there’s going to be no predictability as to when I will post. Sorry.
WHITE SOX! WHITE SOX! GO-GO WHITE SOX!
About the Class
Since moving last month, I've been re-assessing my home and possessions and have made a decision to get rid of my fawns. Trying to take a more minimalistic approach to decorating my home. At the moment, it looks more like a thrift store than a home, and its making us crazy! So goodbye Bambi, Fawny and all your little buddies...I will miss you!
The only problem I see: having to tell that kid 84 times/day not to touch that fruit or those books on my perfectly styled coffee table :)
59637_Intro.pdf ).
“The leaders need to Pay Attention to Value Metrics, Too. These values metrics provide insights into how well the employee population believes that their company trusts, respects, and honors them, day in and day out.
McKnight’s reference point in this undulating quest to define “gospel” is 1 Corinthians 15, in which Paul actually puts some substance behind the word. In fact, it’s the only place in the New Testament where the gospel is more or less defined. The passages are worth quoting.
Susan Shulman, Ria Vanden Eynde and myself have been in high gear with over a dozen projects squeezed into the past two years and we wanted something physical to show the scope and variety of what we've accomplished with our experiment in social media networking.
Today, I find myself surrounded by an incredible army of righteous spirits. These young boys, that I get to raise, and the wonderful man that I get to spend eternity with are more than I could have ever asked for.I feel the Lord teaching me daily about the things we need to teach our children to prepare them for eternity. I feel the beautiful burden that comes with raising future missionaries, and future husbands, and future daddies. I feel the rewards of being a wife and a mother, and ...
What about you guys? What do you do when you switch from revision to drafting? Do you have any tricks to pass along?
I don't have a picture of my weekend, but I do have some great Easter images to share. Will that do?
Psalms 5:8
Will be interested to see what you guys think and what games you would recommend to get people started?
Now, we took very aggressive steps when I first came into office to yank the economy out of a potential Great Depression and stabilize it. And we were largely successful in stabilizing it. But we stabilized it at a level where unemployment is still too high and the economy is not growing fast enough to make up for all the jobs that were lost before I took office and the few months after I took office.
remember This Sessions goes right through January st 1 2012!
The distinguishing characteristic of depersonalization disorder is the feeling that one is going through the motions of life, or that one’s body or self is disconnected or unreal. Mind or body may be perceived as unattached, seen from a distance, existing in a dream, or mechanical. Such experiences are persistent and recurrent, and lead to distress and dysfunction. Chronic depersonalization is commonly accompanied by “derealization,” the feeling that features of the environment are illusory. It should be noted that characteristics attributed to depersonalization disorder must be independent of any kind of substance abuse. It should also be noted that depersonalization as an isolated symptom may appear within the context of a wide variety of major psychiatric disorders. For example, mild episodes of depersonalization in otherwise normally functioning individuals have been reported following alcohol use, sensory deprivation, mild social or emotional stress or sleep deprivation, and as a side effect to medications. However, severe depersonalization is considered to be present only if the sense of detachment associated with the disorder is recurrent and
He was already racing toward the exit as he called out, “Sorry lady, ask the librarian. I’m in a hurry.”
Term:
I have a cold, and trying to figure out how to get all my hotmail messages into neat little folders is agrravating it. There is a new feature that lets you type the sender of a message into a search box, it is supposed to search your INBOX; IT DOES NOT search your inbox (i.e. I type the name of a certain email into the search box, it has the date on the right hand of the email; I put it into a folder and go back, the same one with the same date appears at the top of the search; so i get wise and realize that it has not even searched my inbox, just the folder where I have the emails). I have certain folders to keep my emails in. MSN should know this, but for some dumb reason, It searches the folders. HEY! OF COURSE I would have all of one type of email in a folder. I PUT THEM THERE! SEARCH THE INBOX, NOT THE FOLDERS!
Here's what it looked like when I first moved to the city:
Mr. Dawes also posted a copy of The Weekly Mail, the Mail & Guardian’s former name, from 1986 in which lines of an article were blacked out because of government censorship. It was routine practice in those days, Mr. Dawes said.
AmCham in Slovakia. The Kats have learned from their friend Zuzana Hecko (Allen & Overy) about an early World IP Day event held last week by the American Chamber of Commerce in Slovakia -- an IP-and-business seminar. Says Zuzana:
“I Am a Singer” has focused on artists and performers who are not currently enjoying a great amount of mainstream popularity, so our choices must exclude massively popular acts. The singers or bands may have once been popular in the past and we are being a little flexible with what we consider popular. Since this is indie/underground we're talking about, few singers and bands will fail this test.
What’s funny to me, is that this person obviously thought they were cool enough for someone else to want them. They gave them up for re-sale. Or they just couldn’t bear to see their hard work get tossed.
Pradip’s inspired idea was to create the Dip-Bahan, a faster, lighter rickshaw and then, under a microfinance model, allow pullers to buy the rickshaw and repay the loan in 18 months, on a daily basis. When banks refused to finance production of the new Dip-Bahans, Pradip went to businesses and cleverly got them to invest by giving them deeply discounted ad rates on the backs of the rickshaws. Once the puller owns his rickshaw, he can double his income and begin to pull himself and his family out of poverty. Pradip also finances uniforms, shoes, licenses, health and accident insurance, and photo ID cards under the same microfinance model, to bring respect, safety and camraderie to the profession.
iBooks Author should be a big hit with both small and large publishers, teachers, and anyone else who wants to become a published eBook author. While the original aim is the educational market, made obvious by all six templates being textbooks, iBooks Author really has much wider appeal and could very well start an independent iPad book publishing craze on the iBookstore just like the App Store did years ago for apps. I’ve been playing around with the app all morning and it really is nice, with surprisingly powerful tools put into a simple to use interface.
Cut it back!
SURPRISE!! Pictures! Working on a header.....which at the rate we are losing the camera it might be the header going into spring!
After looking in-depth at the living costs that would affect students in 2012 it is apparent that the actual rise in living costs is relatively small. Closer to 3% rather than the 5% that has been reported in the press.
Thank you for your prayers, love, and encouragement these last few weeks. It has been bittersweet in so many ways.
“Would you carry my bag out to the car?” she said. I took the suitcase to the cab, then returned to assist the woman. She took my arm and we walked slowly toward the curb. She kept thanking me for my kindness.
I didn't mean to be away for so long, but the last couple of months have been a bit strange.
The agreement included a decision to reduce the international filing fee under the PCT by 5% (this means that the international filing fee will fall from 1,400 SFr to 1,330 SFr) and to increase the reduction from 75% to 90% for countries whose per capita national income is below US$3,000, as well as to Antigua and Barbuda, Bahrain, Barbados, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Oman, Seychelles, Singapore, Trinidad and Tobago and the United Arab Emirates. This fee reduction will be effective from 1 July 2008.
This approach not only to religion, but all other aspects of one's life as well is very good advice to follow.
The months will pass; there'll be no word.
Coming home. Living in the most precious place on Earth.
2. Sewing! I've been sewing like crazy, making mei tais, cloth diapers, and tried my first pair of fleece longies. I have a folder on my FB of my recent projects if your interested or bored lol http://www.facebook.com/#!/album.php?aid=2055623&id=1165500151
Also, two more quick pieces of news:
Keep an eye on it.
if the tops of your garlic are turning brown and dying back...
I admit that at first glance this layout is a bit overwhelming...well for me anyways...but I love how it turned out...and of course I love all of these CTMH products...click on each image for a larger view if you'd like
Before we got to it, we saw an abandoned motorbike lying on its side, on the pavement, halfway into a bus shelter. There was a dark pool of petrol coming out of it, as if the motorbike was bleeding.
release me in peace as you promised.
These two NPC’s (Coreiel for Horde, Aldraan for Alliance) hang around in Halaa when your faction controls it. For those of you who don’t know, Halaa is a PvP capture point in Nagrand, and offers rewards such as mounts and a JC pattern. Those however are not the key points to these vendors. What we will be focusing on is the 2 green quality weapons they provide; The Sharp Cookie / Avenging Blades and Arkadian Claymore / Halaani Claymore.
How the uncool girl was dictating to everyone what was cool reminds me of many, many fashion magazines. Take Seventeen's August issue. (I just read it because my dad neglected to tell me he gave it to me until recently, and he has my September copy.) Anywho, I love the section where they tell you the cutest stuff at the mall, so you don't have to work that tiny brain of yours to pick out something you like and put your own outfit together. I mean really, who has time for thinking for themselves?
Add grated ginger, garlic, carrom seeds, lemon juice, chopped coriander, chickpea powder and salt. Toss well to ensure they are coated all over. Cover and leave it in the fridge for 2 hours.
There was a hint of consumer fairness in the air back in 2009. Elizabeth Razzi at voices.washingtonpost.com said:
"Somewhere in the middle of the history of our struggle, after the formation of the Union of South Africa in 1910, all of us realised the need for unity and when the ANC was formed the call was loud and clear that we must work together.
Me: Ummm seriously?
Ho. Ly. Shit.
Chris Hani - Leader of the South African Communist Party,
Finally,it arrived.Overjoyed Andy(my boss)got up very early to embrace it.He even hummed some tune as a celebration personally.
And my God, I’ve got a flightful
And that was not okay.
Hello loves and happy Sunday! I haven't done a Fun Sunday in a while now and that's mainly because I find it hard to come up with something interesting every week. But this week I'm really excited to show you what I've been doing in my free time (well besides nails obviously) for the last few weeks. I've seen this done on a few blogs and wanted to try it. A month or so ago I finally found a Romanian supplier that had what I needed, so I got to work. I won't write a tutorial just because there are already good ones out there and I just followed them. This one from Rebecca likes nails and this one by Chalkboard Nails are great.
And that's that!
I peeled, cored and sliced 2 apples
Tushingham
Overall, it’s not a matter of a lack of information that ‘breeds confusion and fear’ in this situation. It’s his leadership and game plan itself that has turned people off. What these media hacks don’t want to admit is that misinformation, improper communication, and the resulting confusion is not by accident, it’s on purpose. If people don’t know or are confused as to the facts, it’s easier to mislead them and knock their efforts to organize against you when you’ve got power.
Naomi Allen, her arms and legs strung out to her sides, strapped down to stubby poles she could not see, lay shuddering. The only light - a breath of radiance shooting through a distant keyhole - spangled across the thousand pin heads that pierced her trembling flesh. A bed of nails, she was. Only more so.
My children got very excited when And Rocky Too dropped through the letterbox. Like me, they’d loved The Stephensons’ Rocket, Jayne Woodhouse’s first story about injured greyhound Rocky and the troubled family who, in taking him in, find themselves drawn back together.
For those of you who don't "do awards", consider my link a sign of how much I enjoy reading you!
What funny synonyms or near-synonyms do you have for “barking at the ants”.
The Album is accompanied by quite some extras, e.g. four videos, form concerts, and one of them exclusively for the album, there are classical violin recordings (you may know that Emilie Autumn is an excellent violinist) playing songs by Bach, an excerpt of a reading of her book, an “interview” (really funny), a poem (she also wrote poems), etc.
26. In The Year 2525—Zager and Evans
Finally, I thought too of saying that Robyn’s Body Talk albums is 2010′s most precious thing. I want to implore everyone to download it since it’s one of those albums they don’t make available in CDs in 3rd world nations, and I think it is really so good. You really, really should hear it. It’s the best. Do you remember 90s singer Robyn? Do You Really Want Me Am I Really Special and Show Me Love? It would have been so gratifiying to win P3000 GC at its expense by saying at 500 words or less, about how much I wanted to give 2010 a blow job for giving birth to Body Talk.
Something tickled his eyelashes as it pressed onto his face, and no strength of will could keep him from blinking. Clearsight departed and only then did the light disappear. The pressure on his face was warm, a hand covering his eyes, but his nerves were so raw that he didn't notice the panic until it was past. Taslin had covered his eyes, forced him to break out of Clearvision.
There are times that we flub an endeavor and we know that we haven’t done a job quite up to par. But then there are times like today when we believe that we have done a good job–perhaps the best in years–and find that we have scrambled and confused everything, making a lot of extra work for someone else.
03. Cities
1 lb of fresh okra, ends cleaned, cut in halves if too long
Combine the two grated cheeses. Set aside.
Wrestling fans the Delirious card is one that you will not want to miss.
contemplating completely shutting down, but I would miss hearing
4. Perform RCA/RCF
If I want to make a little drive then I would drive up the Middle Fork of the Willamette River. I like to access the river at Black Canyon campground. But, you can also access it at Oakridge Park. And if you even drive further up the road you will end up in the Salmon Creek, which is where I caught my first fish on a fly. The water is clear and beautiful.
“Cinnamon is probably too tame a name for you,” DJ told him.
God bless him, I have never lusted after a man so much when he walked back into the room, dusting the cold powder from his shoulders…regardless of the fact that he was easily pushing 70 years old.
Mostly down.
+ HICOUP – Ghetto Factory
This week it is B
Usually when you buy a box of Dolly wink lashes, it contains 2 pairs of same lashes. This limited edition contains upper and lower lashes.
SPOKEN:
I also use thigh meat because I prefer dark to white meat, but you can use the breast. I threw the thighs on a sheet pan with some salt and pepper and roast for about 40 minutes, flipping halfway through. I roasted it at 350 since I didn’t need a crusty outside or anything.
The first of these councils, the famous Nicea Council, denounced Arianism, a teaching that Christ was a created being. The three councils that followed took up other aspects of the relationship between Christ’s divinity and humanity.
The whole movie there is this love stroy going on between him and the main girl and they only kiss once the entire movie. Call me a sap, but I was expecting a little more than that. Booooo. Chris Evans did look pretty handsome though. ;)
They held the show in the same museum, but they spread the student work throughout the upper galleries so it was mixed in with the stuff on permanent display. There was much more room to move around, and breathe every now and again. Still crowded, but tolerably so.
As night falls, Happy Slap Boutique will transform into a plethora of circus, fire and glow performances alongside clowning, grotesque burlesque, world famous 'Rave Aerobics' and surprise acts that keep buzzing all night.
Few return’d, nearly all remain in Brooklyn.
After the meeting, they lowered his flow on his cannula to 1.5 liters of oxygen/min, which he handled just fine. (Less flow means less chances to aspirate) They also pulled the feeding tube back to the stomach again. We were a bit worried that they were making too many changes too fast for him to keep up with. Thursday was a big day, but our boy did well!
I didn't think such a thing was possible, and I may well find someone who doesn't like it. But if you're trying to share your love of beer with someone who adamently (and honestly) hates beer, give the Duchesse a try.
T: damn, that sucks. but at least he wasn't penis-sexing your girl in the butt!
That's politics for you.
WALGREENS 5/6
Jim Lindeman
There's nothing wrong with tooting your own horn to get attention. If you don't have a press agent (and really, who of you does?) then it's going to be mostly up to you to draw attention to whatever it is that you are doing. Don't look at self-promotion as something negative. It's the most common start on the road to success.
A more specific restriction on the models’ attire is that no more than two-thirds of their backs should be uncovered. One has to respect the mathematical precision of the ruling. A professor on safari told me that at least six measurements would be required to work out the bare-back ratio. I suppose an eager little fellow with an inch tape will be taking the girls’ dimensions from behind and feeding the data into his programmable calculator. It’s the sort of job any self-respecting geek would pay for the privilege of doing.
Observation: Since we believe that angels are sent to free us from the prison of our sinful behavior, shouldn’t we hear this scripture passage about taking our position in the temple? Specifically, if I have been liberated from my sin, shouldn’t I be taking my position in the church that I am called to take to follow the direction that is given to me from these verses.
Islam permits marrying a woman from the People of the Book, or a Christian, so that she will enter the Muslim family and society.
Preheat the oven to 350-degrees F. Line two cupcake pans with paper liners. (If you only have one muffin pan, simply cook half of the graham cracker and cupcake mixture and then repeat.) In a small mixing bowl, combine the graham cracker crumbs, sugar and melted butter; mix well with a fork. Drop a heaping 1 Tablespoon of the graham cracker mixture in the bottom of each cupcake liner and press down to line the bottom. (Set the rest of the crumbs aside and mix half (1-ounce) of the grated Hershey Bar with them.) Bake until golden and lightly fragrant, about 5 minutes. Sprinkle the other half of the grated Hershey's Bar on top of the warm crusts and let cool.
How do you keep the passion burning in your relationship with storytelling?
We just need a spark
But, in the mid 1990′s gays legally were able to serve in the Canadian military, by the late 1990′s gays and lesbians were legally protected from discrimination in housing and employment in 2000, gays and lesbians could be legally deemed common law married and in 2003, we were able to actually get married.
Applications will be accepted from a wide range of organisations including community groups, heritage organisations and charities. The application process is simple:
The City of Auburn Hills is proving each day that in this “New Economy” being fast and effective is the difference between winning and losing when attracting and retaining businesses.
religion, mysticism – but also more recently from
We then took the bus further across the island to Penguin Land! Chiloe island is home to Magellan and some other penguins (which look pretty similar but one has 1 stripe and the other has 2) we took a small boat out into the sea to see the penguins…they were so cute. They live here from December to March to breed. We also saw cormorants and a red beaked oyster catcher (I’m sure that’s probably not it’s real name) Whilst on the boat, it began to rain a little harder….by the time we were finished, we were soaked through. The next group of penguin watchers were given ponchos….we were jealous. We attempted to dry off and warm up in a cafe, but the owner had no hot chocolate and then ran out of mil for the people who wanted coffee. More bus time to the main city of Ancud (this bus was really crappy and had already started to leak water out of the ceiling light making one of the back seats unsuitable for human occupation) along mor winding roads – I don’t remember this part – having already become travel sick on the initial bus/ferry/bus/bus/penguins boat part of the trip, my eyes closed and I believe I slept (preferable to throwing up on your fellow travellers) we arrived at the fort, built to protect Chiloe island from someone who wanted to invade or possibly to keep the spanish out during a civil war, I don’t remember, I’d just woken up. This was followed by a quick trip to a church exhibition (Chiloe has about 16 churches that are protected by UNESCO, just a small selection of it’s huge collection of churches) and local market which sold fish (naturally) veg and dried seaweed along with the naffest collection of handicrafts I’ve ever seen. It still hadn’t stopped raining, so we decided to call it a day, get back on the bus and head back to the ferry.
So there you go - a heartwarming tale of how the internet works for the good, connecting people and unearthing lost treasures. I really have no idea how the TD/ST combo works for anyone who doesn't recall it from back in the day, but to me it still sounds magical. It's good to be back.
There are rumors coming out that may change the video game world forever. But not in a good way. Microsoft and Sony are both considering banning the use of used games.
Whole-wheat pasta with tomatoes, feta and olives
The latest existing home sales data was disappointing. However, the sales are being help back by something we did not think would happen this year–lower inventory levels. If short sales continue to rise, which means foreclosures don’t hit the markets as we think they will–could this portend a surge in building this year? The constructuion jobs created would spur further recovery. Read the following articles from CNN/Money which are on point:
Laurajtaylor2010 - 18
(Hiding Out In My Craft Room)
Set a large bowl, and the beaters of a hand mixer into the fridge for 2 hrs. Now pour the cream into the chilled bowl and start whipping it. Add the vanilla extract and continue to wipe it.
The second hour, I was lured to a panel on "Breaking the Rules" because Dr. Doug Lyle is always good for a laugh. The topics touched upon characters who do things their own way, and what the author can do to make them credible. Those in licensed professions have rules and standards they must follow. Dr. Lyle mentioned that he wanted his character outside of the medical profession, so he never finished medical school. This freed him from having to follow the rules.
"Annie is a good name," I said.
and golden squash piled high upon your kitchen table.
What’s the connection between oral health and overall health?
7. Carefully, but quickly, fold in the sifted flour mixture.
When the the Highborne were exiled, they eventually settled in the Eastern Kingdoms, in an area now known as Tirisfal Glades in the then-Human kingdom of Lordaeron. They settled there because they could sense the magic of the place, something the Highborne needed to feed their magical addiction since the destruction of their former source, the Well of Eternity. Soon after settling in Tirisfal, some of the Highborne slowly began to go mad, and those who yet retained their sanity realized the source of the Glade’s magical power was something truly evil. It is thought this evil magic is due to the presence of an Old God, imprisoned deep beneath Tirisfal.
Authors Giorgio de Santillana and Hertha von Dechend of (IMHO) one of the greatest compilations of world mythology, (Hamlet’s Mill 1969, 1977, 2002) call the Bible ‘that most unscientific of records.’
Attorney Application Forms
As I was thinking about how to update our blog tonight, I kept thinking back to a conversation I had with Derek last night...totally unrelated to our blog...yes my mind is crazy like that. We were talking about how much we love our children and how we sometimes look at them in awe that they are ours. We also talked about how life can be stressful with children, especially multiple children, and how many people in society view children as a burden, not a joy...even to the point of illustrating them as a burden in birth control commercials. I will be the first to admit, being a parent is the hardest thing I have ever done! It is also the most amazing and selfless thing God has allowed me to experience and struggle through. It truly is a JOY to be able to hug and kiss and teach and console and correct and care for my children every single day. And some days I get it really right and most days I am on my face begging the Lord and my children for forgiveness and grace!
Style Quote for the Day: “Elegance is a question of personality, more than one’s clothing.” Jean-Paul Gaultier
The shift toward e-books isn't as pronounced in other English-speaking countries as it is in the United States, which is probably as much a function of platform/device availability/e-book rights as it is purely one of population size. For instance, e-book sales in the UK in 2010 were £180MM, or about $294MM; compare that to US 2010 e-book sales of $441.3MM.
At any rate, this show was doomed to fail, although I was naive enough at the age of 14 to be bitterly disappointed. A couple of years later though he got Late Night with David Letterman, a much more savvy bit of television scheduling…following hard on the heels of The Tonight Show, the late hour was another borrowing from SNL. Letterman’s was the first later than late night talk show, setting the template for all those that exist now. My buddies and I were die-hard fans. (In retrospect, what the hell were we doing watching television — together — at that hour? These memories must be of Friday nights). For this show Letterman mixed his crazy comedy (e.g., the adrogynous senior citizen Larry” Bud” Mellman, and Chris Elliott as a crank who lived under the seats) with interviews with top celebrity guests. At this stage, I had little interest in Carson, by comparison – much preferred Letterman to The Tonight Show. I was very devoted. I was even watching when Andy Kaufman staged his famous stunt with Jerry Lawler, and realized at the time that it was a stunt. I thought then and think now, that anyone who couldn’t see IMMEDIATELY that it was a leg-pulling stunt devised for our entertainment was mentally retarded.
Adapted from Forbes.
Stylish Invicta Watches for Discerning Men and Women
5-4-3-2-1 One Legged Bent Over Perfect Row
‘I’d be happy with “a” universe,’ Mr God grumbles, successfully mimicking his wife and covering his side of the kitchen with batter. ‘I think I’ve sorted the Gravity bit out, at least.’
From the ashes and make a new beginning
So, with this whole changing of my ways, I decided to go ahead and just dive right on in. I decided that I would give OCM a try. Last night was my first night doing OCM and oh my stars it was HEAVENLY! You start out with castor oil. This is your "cleansing" oil. You add to it a thinner oil. Most people start out with Extra Virgin Olive Oil, but there are other nice alternatives such as sunflower seed oil or jojoba oil, etc. You mix up your blend according to the ratio recommended for you skin type. Then you pour about a quarter-size amount in your hand, rub your hands together to warm it slightly, then begin massaging your face. And there is no need to clean your face beforehand. Actually, it is better if you don't b/c you don't want to over-cleanse. Olive oil has been used by a lot of women to remove make-up (and let me tell you, it works fabulously) so you can do this right on top of your face full of make-up.
No doubt cases like this one go through the courts all the time but my problem is with the way certain media outlets have picked up this story and completely smeared the young man and his family because they believe his parents should pay for his mistake.
The Adventure 10 is a modern backpack designed for the SLR photographer with a pro digital or film SLR with a grip and 8″ lens attached, numerous additional lenses, a flash, accessories and a 17″ screen laptop. The completely foam-padded lower compartment protects photo equipment, wh… Read More >>
Thus you will need to take the general principles in this book and apply them to your own enterprise. Without working close­ly with you, we can’t identify for you the best social media goals, strategies, sites, and techniques for your business. Only you can do that, and you should use your overall mission, strategy, and goals to determine your social media strategy.
Here are the products the generous ladies at Urban Scrapbook Supplied me with!
game
Sill refusing to look at the camera! Oh, and she refused to let go of that map for hours!
With time and use issues emerge as a natural consequence and so is the case with the Windows XP. In case a user faces such issues various online support for Windows XP are readily available at reasonable rate. Other than Microsoft Windows support for XP line of operating system, there are few more reliable organizations that offer exclusive and comprehensive Remote Support for n number of issues. Let us discuss few of such issues that are instantly taken care of and eliminated within fit of a moment. The most important five such online tech support services for Windows XP:
That very fitting F. Scott Fitzgerald quote was used to close the rerun of Law & Order: Criminal Intent I watched last night. The episode was about a love story that ended with a poor sap being killed by thugs when he tried to be the hero who saved the girl, and the quote stuck in my mind because, beyond being the perfect line to end the show with, it also spoke volumes to me about the emotional roller-coaster I’ve been on for the last few days.
Roy Wood: Forever
marked with the glyph of vengeance. This will add one to the damage he does with each successful blow of his weapon upon his opponent. The point is added after the subtraction of armor, so that he does at least a point of damage whenever he wins the opposed resolution roll.
As usual plenty of uni work, blah blah blah.
Serves 6 – 8 people ~ one pear each.
The "Must-Do" at the top for our class is to read for 15 minutes from their buddy books.
I guess he doesn’t think everything is exactly the way it should be right now because now he is depressed. I don’t know what to do. He often wants to quit because he feels he can never get ahead. He has no idea that he makes me feel the exact same way.
This blog is not only a collection of Arthur Kraft news, but also a community for Kraft enthusiasts to share their knowledge, provide opinions and contribute to the discussion.
fancied our chances in finding Kuhanya taking shelter in a Maroela Tree somewhere in thevicinityy she had been seen in the morning. We set off to check the area and all her favourite haunts in the region paying particular attention to all the large shady trees. Spending the vast majority of the first part of drive criss-crossing Motswari we came up empty handed and eventually resorted to checking an old pump house she likes to frequent on extremely warm days but even here there was no sign of her. With nowhere else to check we decided to head to the South West in search of the Rhino's that we had seen in the morning believing they definitely would not have travelled far. We would return to the area after dark to look for Kuhanya once more. On our way South we received the good news that the Rhino's had in fact not actually moved and were to be found in nearly the exact same spot as they had been in the morning. As it was a long drive it took us a fair time to get there but we were keen on the sighting as it was the one request of our new guests that had joined us for the next couple days. Along the way there we found a number of tracks and signs for a few different breeding herds of Elephant and eventually got lucky in bumping into a small herd that was spread out feeding. They too were feeling the heat and you could see that they had come
God's blessings on you all and keep the comments coming. We read them every day.
There is no charge for admission to the concert/workshop. For additional information, call Congregation Shaarei Torah at 626-445-0810.
Although the incident is part of a continuing investigation, senior police have decided to treat the issue as a health matter, not a criminal one.
Disclaimer: the above is an exercise! Is it overwhelming? Nauseating, repulsive? In parts perhaps. But there is nothing in there, nothing, that isn't present in modern-day marketing.
Dark Passage
I can’t comment on any other romance subplots in the game as I have to do more playthroughs of this series to determine how the others are, but I can say I’m completely satisfied with how the romance between my female Shepard and Kaidan has played out in this game. A faithful Shepard since the first Mass Effect is definitely worth having for this romance. A lot of the romance scenes and dialogue choices between Shepard and Kaidan is worthy of any romantic or fangirl who has been in love with Kaidan since the first game. The emotions feel genuine, and the credit definitely goes to the voice actors for selling the romance to the player well. It also doesn’t hurt that the developers have improved on the look of Kaidan as well.
our own rainbows
Some other options you may consider:
“The next time you come home,” I said, “you’re going to find six pigeons stuck together on sticky paper, unable to fly.”
My lenten sacrifice is going well though. I only ate meat on Sunday, and then I cooked it last night, and we're having knockoff Chipotle tonight, so meat again. Maybe Friday will be my other vegetarian day this week since they'll be leftovers for tomorrow's dinner I'm sure.
“Once the capital of Gandhara, Peshawar is so old that its origins are lost in antiquity,” remarked Dr. Ihsan Ali, former Director Archeology Museum Department and presently Vice Chancellor Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan.
The problem lies with the fact that the product is not, in the beginning, physical, although in the end, with the help of agent and publisher it will become so. My primary products are ideas and creativity, which eventually result in a book. In the 'real world', almost every product we buy in the shops starts with a creative idea - sometimes big, sometimes small. Without James Dyson's creative and inventive mind, we would have no bagless vacuum cleaner. Without some nameless genius's creative input, we would have no Cadbury's Fruit and Nut Chocolate. You see where I'm going with this? Everything, yes everything, starts with an idea. Some work, some don't. That's why every writer will have a drawer (or, nowadays, computer folder) full of manuscripts that will never see the light of day.
was a doubter who loved the wind
I remember my first day of high school back in 1972,
Paleo Portion:
But it's another story to get her heart and body to let go of a child she's sheltered , and loved in her body for 6 months.........
“We followed where the evidence led us!” Bourneville recited as though she’d heard it a thousand times.
"Marked by sly wit and a certain old-fashioned jauntiness, this tale of three chums on a quest for indolence strikes many a wish-fulfillment fancy...Hartinger blends urban legend with the actual history of Tacoma’s routing of its Chinese community (author’s note included) to craft an irresistible setting (who wouldn’t want to explore lost tunnels under a city in search of treasure?), humorous episodes tinged with mild danger, and a light-hearted mystery"
Q: How does Thrive make money then?
“What happened???”screamed Andy,so did some of the guests entertaining around in the lobby.
Guuurl, I love 'dem shoes.
It makes me realize how aware I must be in order, that my thoughts do not take me directly into fear.
The Name Game swap miniquilt that I made for Wendy has arrived in Queensland, so I now show what I made. Wendy’s blog name is Sugar Lane Quilts. I was going to make something sweet, and then I read Wendy’s blog where she talks about how much they love living in Queensland, where they grow sugarcane and have lovely beaches. So I went with that theme. I was super pleased with how this turned out.
I'm not feeling so put upon this month. But there's always something to whine about.
an apostle of godly
While these are all incredible smokes for cigars lovers (with still a lot to offer, given that they are still quite young cigars) I overall love the BHK 52 and I have been saying often to my friends that this is probably my favorite amongst the Behike, a reasonably short and incredibly punchy smoke, rich of aroma and coffee flavour.
Studies prove that certain elements in life are ruled by our natural abilities, our intuition, our tastes and habits are all influenced by our genetic disposition.
I must not eat green cheese and ham.
from every hull these rocks have claimed
Surprise! More pictures of Kelsey, of course. This week, she had her 4 month checkup. She is growing like crazy. This is more for Mom Davis than anyone else but here are her stats:
Genocide.
Off she goes again and this time I am forced to run for the cover of the Monkey Puzzle tree. Bloody spiky that tree! Again, I am undetected.
Ingredient for the fillings
Blacks are present in the highest levels of government as well. Two recent Secretaries of State, Colin Powell and Condoleeza Rice, were African-Americans. There is a Black Caucus in the House of Representatives.
Ta ta
It’s amazing the degree to which outreach strategies rest on a single, and deeply flawed, premise:
Tilly
September is a weird place. We’re having now a taste of a summer that has never happened this year and it feels like something that you really should have done in your youth and you’re doing in your middle age as a sort of compensation. In the garden, the tomatoes are still green, the one-and-only green pepper that I had now lies on the ground, nibbled by squirrels, and the grass is covered with red and yellow maple leaves.
This rather fine sign in Catford is largely obscured by the bank next door. As so often, this isi a mixed blessing: while it is now easy to miss and difficult to photograph, it has been protected from the worst of the elements. Indeed, the difference in shade between the upper and lower parts shows how important that protection has been.
I’m not 100% old lady since I like contemporary music too: Taylor Swift, Selina Gomez, J-Lo, Owl City, Back Street Boys, Klute, some Gwen Stefani, Lady Gaga and a little Enrique (his older songs).
As in the previous book, Roth doesn’t shy away from hitting our favourite characters with major blows, but as there is a lot more life-threatening action in this book than in Divergent, those blows, in whatever form, aren’t reserved for just the end. I was close to tears on more than one occasion over the dirty tactics of the cold Erudite Jeanine. Knowing this from the previous book, it is foolish to get too attached to some characters you get to know better, yet impossible not to do. In more ways than one, this book is an incredibly hard and brutal read, but much like a car crash, you can’t turn away.
Excuse me, but aren't sharks (besides not being heavy breathers) also supposed to be in perpetual motion or else they'll die? I think I heard that in school once. Seems René or Ramón or Christina didn't take that class. Otherwise, el Bruce del Tiburón wouldn't be staying off to one side, lurking in wait while those stupid fleshy humans splash around in his water. Thinking, "soon"....
listening rock again
Parents. Perhaps the most publicized problem with the current system
happen in the studio," she says. "But then a lot of the times
Thank you all again.
Also: Check out Carol's Daughter's body butters.
Band Members
The first category that we were given was James Bond movies. Oh Good. I knew James Bond movies. The team of Bill and Ray said that they could name 7. Without even consulting Jessica, I opened my big mouth and said 13. She looked shocked. The emcee informed the other team that we said we could name 13 and they stopped their bidding and told us to name them. I knew all of the Sean Connery James Bond movies, and spouted them all off before Jessica could even say anything. I still had it in my mind that she didn’t know anything. Lucky for me, however, she knew all of the more current James Bond movies and was able to name them. We had named 12. One more to go. I went blank and so did Jessica. The clock was ticking. Finally Eamonn Holmes said, “Bob and Jessica, you need to hurry. Time is running out”. I muttered under my breath, “Damn, I wish he would stop rushing us”.
Two potted Ficus trees on either side of our gate. We also have a small bistro table (you can see it peaking into stage right), another Ficus (not pictured) and some potted trellis plants as well (also MIA from this pic).
Chris had taken a couple of days off work so we had a long weekend together. Friday we got everything out of the loft, found all the Christmas bits out and set about putting up the tree, only to realise we didnt have any lights so Saturday morning we went to buy some, had a trip to the cinema for their movies for juniors, we saw Cars 2 which Emy enjoyed and then we went into town as Emy had a dance exam. They had changed the time of the exam which I didnt know about so this ment hanging around in town for quiet a while! that evening we got the christmas lights out of the box to find they were tiny and not anywhere near enough to cover our tree, so we boxed them back up and put the decorating on hold again.
"The Jews said to the man who had been healed, 'It is the Sabbath; the law forbids you to carry your mat.'" John 5:10
5. To decorate: pipe the pink icing onto the biscuits to make noses and mouths.
They don’t change simply because of the power of love, but because they are both have such fierce tempers, such stubborn determination that they have to find a way to compromise. They have such vastly different lives and to combine them, both parties have to understand each other.
These desserts can be as simple or complex as you would like them to be. The important aspect of them is they have layered flavors. How many layers? How many flavors? Well, that is up to the creator. The ones I am sharing with you are somewhat simple in flavor combinations but never simple in makeup and assembly!
1) Position the stencil carefully, then press down all the edges insuring no paint will seep through.
Forever and a day ago I read this sweet piece by Nichole.
So it's been a week.... a crazy week.... a busy week.... a tearful week.... a week of new found appreciation.... a week of closeness.... a week of pulling together.... a week of denial.... a week of avoidance.... a week of bi-polar emotions... a week of gratefulness.
On the first of January I set myself some goals. In my definitely category I said:
Real Estate Institute’s Canterbury branch head David Rankin, said landlords should not worry about filling accommodation as there would be a high demand for undamaged properties. NZPA
And their cocks in the kitchen
Technology transfer and access to medicines will be facilitated. Yet it is in the field of genetic resources that CA states have obtained the most important negotiation results. Stressing, in an IPR set of rules, that patent protection must not interfere with countries' rights to protect their genetic resources under the Convention on Biological Diversity is a good point, taking into consideration that CA is biodiversity-rich (seldom do IPR treaties include rules protecting genetic resources). Linking IPR with the protection of biodiversity—as the EU-CA association agreement does—is far-sighted and will probably help prevent the misappropriation of genetic resources.
And finally on the topic of autumn beers Founders will have a limited release autumn ale available on the taps around town at the start of next month.
Long after he returned to his classroom, the conversation lingered with me. I began to wonder if I was talking to a soon-to-be-reluctant reader.
I can literally see my lives converging. My “professional” life and my “creative” life, that is. The truth is, they’ve overlapped here and there for some time.
~I haven't checked it for spelling or grammar errors yet, but it sure does look nice.
Last year, Mark Sterling and Jeremy Wyatt delivered the 2011 MWR Match of the year with the first ever 60 minute Iron Man Match during the MWR Years in January of 2011. When the 60 minutes expired and the bell rang, they were tied with no clear cut winner. The fans came to their feet chanting for more. 3XW’s Todd Contryman gave them what they wanted and the match continued. During an explosive 7 minutes of action it would be Mark Sterling who would have his hand raised in victory, thus earning the nickname “The Iron Man”
to come up and ask me what was wrong,
Hulk Smash Avengers #2 (Marvel) Joe Casey and Max Fiumara, extremely aggressively colored by Jean-Francois Beaulieu, pit a 1970s squad of Avengers against The Hulk, only this time much of the story is devoted to who's joining the team, who's leaving the team, who they would like to join the team, why the people leaving are leaving, and government liaison Henry Gyrich generally grinding The Avengers' gears.
Just when we thought we had the flight plan filed correctly (Wonder Doc and I, that is), that dang Alien* sprang up again and is wreaking havoc. We’d thought that we’d fly non-stop on this new flight, but that somehow doesn’t figure into the Alien’s plans. Well! we have news for it!
McBride and his cronies decided to burn down his former school namely, Fairvale Senior Secondary School, because he believed the education provided there was of inferior quality. McBride poured petrol onto the building and set it alight.
Today was supposed to have a MDUC day for me but it did not happen, we have a gorgeous sketch to play with, please go and check it out and join it with out challenge this week :)
After much testing, the people of Momokawa felt that the water of Oregon most closely resembled the water they used in Japan. Many areas in Oregon, including Portland, are supposed to have very pure drinking water, which would help produce a better quality sake. In addition, the brewery's water goes through several filtration levels, to remove all unwanted materials, chemicals and microbes. It is said that sake is about 80% water so the quality of that water is extremely important.
However, Jean-Christophe Lagarde (is he related to Christine?) was, until his suspension last week, head of ‘urban security’ for the Nord administrative region that includes the city of Lille. An ambitious senior civil servant, Lagarde believed that ‘by cultivating a close relationship with DSK he would have an important role in a future Socialist administration’ – according to one unnamed source quoted in the French daily newspaper Libération.
This past weekend while I was in my training for Body Pump, I made sure to pack myself lunch and adequate snacks. While I was eating one of my snacks, some of the girls that I had made friends with asked what I was eating. I told them what this tasty little morsel was and rattled off the ingredient list without really thinking anything of it. Both of their eyes lit up, and they asked where I got the recipe. “I made it up!” was the answer, and instantly a light bulb clicked in my head that I should make them a batch of this little treat and share the recipe with them.
Being skeptical sorts here at NAC, we've looked past the performance of the attending mayors and focused instead on the current state of temporary/temporary 1Si "leadership" in the absence of permanent/temporary top-salary-garnering:
The reader can see, feel and smell the sacred places, the homes, and the pilgrim pathways. We hear waves smash on the coastline of Vancouver Island, taste the dust of a prairie graveyard, and ache for the solitude of a Yukon peak. Sibley writes dialogue naturally and captures the characters of the people he meets.
My co-workers pointed out that I am not at my best at 0500 in morning traffic. So I went back online and filled out my personality profile. It told me I was 12% done and it wanted me to list my "passions..." So I listed how I'm "passionate about how I tend to hate other drivers. It told me to list some facts about what I wanted my potential matches to know about me. (Obviously, they didn't read my personality profile!!)
Well the Ribs kinda overpower the chicken..but that’s not the point..
Statehood is a responsibility to be earned. And so far the Palestinian national movement has hardly proved its willingness to live in peace beside Israel. Palestinian schools and media — those of Fatah as well as of Hamas — routinely portray Israel as an artificial and temporary creation, without any rootedness in the land. All of Jewish history — from the ancient temple in Jerusalem to the Holocaust — is dismissed as a lie. No Palestinian leader has told his people — as Israeli prime ministers since Yitzhak Rabin have told their people — that the land must be shared by two nations. Instead, Palestinian leaders have consistently told their people that the goal is a state on all the land between the Jordan River and the Mediterranean Sea, and they encourage their people to dream of a Middle East without Israel. --YK Halevi
To finish off my mantel I added two candlesticks, poked on a couple of white candles tied with a little green checked ribbon and I was done!
Honestly, pick one of the following: just walk a little faster; move to the side; don’t walk five people abreast; endeavour to posses a minuscule amount of spatial awareness; don’t ever leave your house and buy everything you need online.
To see a woman from a remote village in Kazakhstan communicate with a woman from a big city in America reaffirms how small the world is in which we live. Not only did I know exactly what she wanted, but she understood my response and acknowledged her gratitude.
3. The body broken for us
Why a risk, you ask? Because you never know how people will react to advice from a stranger.
Human Nature
But even though Cherie lights a cigarette at the wrong end and dances around dressed as Stevie Nicks we're still never quite sure what drugs she's doing or what kind of rock star she really wants to be. Joan gets to fill her squirt gun with vodka and later urinate on the macho shithead headliner's guitars; she really IS the wild one, and you hope some wild will off to Cherie's side and for awhile it does. When their plane's about to land in Japan, the pair quickly wolf down their coke and pills in the airplane bathroom to avoid trouble with customs and suddenly the film speeds up for the butterfly stomach sweaty-palmed high of being cranked up onstage, twirling under the hot lights, merging like a playback pitchshift melt with the slow-downs of their first kisses in the dark of post-show euphoria.Their big seduction lesbian moment comes drenched in red light and scored to a slowed, druggy "I Wanna Be Your Dog" that makes you ache in rock and roll remembrance of the first trip on acid; the first trip on ecstasy, the first kiss backstage, or anywhere; first time on stage on acid, the blazing red lights in your face as you sing and flames form a holy funnel around the microphone and your mouth becomes the size of a black hole in outer space, spewing flaming lyrics into the clenched alien insect fangs of the microphone, and outwards in waves of pink that wash over the melting-faced fans. It's a first kiss that starts as a gentle shotgun from a joint and slowly tentatively becomes a supernova of blinding white light. From their first gig to Cherie passing out in Japan, the film is alive with pleasure.
Here are three tips for knowing if you're idea is a keeper.
My idea for this was A Mid Summer Nights Dream, so I think it fits the current Crafty Individuals Challenge. When I was child I used to love making rosewater, you know gathering loads of fragrant petals and soaking them in water. It invariably went stagnant rather quickly though LOL, but rose perfume always reminds of a perfect balmy Summers evening.
Because I lurve purple so much... I couldn't stop at 1 piece... I did 2 (Fozzy Bear wokka, wokka, wokka!)
flours
So for this card I used some awesome new valentines paper that I had gotten, along with some ribbon and for the candy box I used a glitter pen to add some sparkle and crystal effects on each piece of candy and the bow to give it a glossy affect.
For example, in The Hammer, Gig creates a factory and with it, guns. This isn't new technology to the setting. It's not a new method. But no one has done it before because no one thought of it. No one took the time to do it. No one was interested in it. Everyone was interested in keeping things the exact way they were, fighting that inevitable decline of their ways as society collapsed slowly, ever so slowly about them.
All this gets back to what I said earlier..."fundamentally alter the core of the way we live."
EDIT: Ward Mundy reports that he just may have found a workaround for the incoming calls issue — see this thread in the PBX in a Flash forum.
3) “a people or group of peoples regarded as deriving from a common stock“
Can't I say "thank you" and demonstrate my gratitude just one more time?
You can see in the photo below the back panel with the pleats stitched in place and the lining for the gown fronts attached. Also one of the side skirt panels. Not a perfect matching of the floral print but I like the overall look. The panels for the gown skirts are cut and stitch together and are ready to be attached to the bodice. I still need to cut sleeves and the bodice fronts. My deadline for this gown was April 14th but I've pushed it back until the 1st of June.
Nothing to love or link with,
much of what surrounds it was breaking down barriers and challenging and redefining what the show could be. There’s no question that regardless of these criticisms, the story still has that same great chemistry between Baker and Sladen – apparently nothing can dim that light – and if a story has that, it most definitely has something worth checking out.
deal with performance issues: there may be problems around staff watching lengthy coverage via their computers. Why not plan for popular sporting events in advance – perhaps giving staff access to a tv during agreed times?
Current City: Whistler, British Columbia
Should I have read Stieg Larsson?
So that's my interesting week so far, lets hope my internet stays up for a while so that I can catch up on some blog reading.
-Place the dumplings in a steamer, cover and steam for 7-10 minutes.
Oh the complaining. Oh the whining.
Dawn Media Group
Did I mention that it was on the night right before M's birthday party? The guests and their parents were very gracious about holding their breath and the fact that they left reeking of skunk (that smell gets into everything).
So has anyone else had that experience--re-reading a book and not remembering anything about it? Or should I be consulting a memory specialist?
While chicken is cooking boil the eggs. I do this by placing the eggs in a pot, covering with cold water and bringing to a boil. I boil for 1 min and then cover the pot and remove from heat. I let sit in the hot water for 17 mins then immediately place into a bowl of ice water and let cool completely.
Citizen watches are made by a company that was started in 1918. The company was originally called Citizen, but soon afterwards changed its name to Citizen Watch Company. It now trades as Citizen Holdings Co., Ltd and is based in Tokyo, Japan. It is also one of the largest watch producers in the world. Citizen watches are well known for their high quality products and their enviable reputation is firmly built on this.
We continue our theme this month on Leadership. Last year I was asked to serve as a consultant for a financial management company. When they initially contacted me they provided very little information on what they actually needed help with. All I was told was that they needed to talk to me very soon. When I arrived, I sat down with a group of eight very emotional executives. They explained to me how their companies IT department had been engaged in unethical business practices. My first question was “How does everyone feel right now?” They each expressed their emotions – anger, fear, and betrayal. The CEO explained they he has been playing golf with the CIO for four years. The CEO never imagined the CIO or even a department in his company would ever engage in any unethical activities. This situation was a serious test of this organizations leadership.
And, wouldn’t you know, my new pillow combo inspired me to paint the back of those bookcases again. From coral back to blue—this time in a peacock shade of Castile by Olympic Paint. I know. It never ends.
At the same time, I realize how incredibly fortunate and blessed we are this holiday season, not only to have food, shelter, and each other, but to truly have everything that anyone could possibly wish for. And I take nothing, none of it, for granted.
Sucking dry the well,
To add an extra element of fun, we have a variety of 1920s inspired photo booth props for you to pose with: hats, hairstyles, headbands, etc. Take a look at a few of the terrific examples visitors made this past Sunday!
Customer
Theodore Roosevelt said, “Comparison is the thief of joy.” I have to remind myself of this quote on a daily basis. I struggle with comparing myself to others a lot, and I warn others to not do the same with me or anyone else. How much happier would we all be if we just focused on ourselves and the blessing in front of us? It’s easier said than done, but it needs to be done.
If there is anything you'd like to tout, please append a comment. As for me, surely the drinking lamp is about to be lit?
It was a couple of years ago. I forget what I was searching for now. Something tree-related - dreams of discovering more grainy black and white shots of loggers enveloped in Southern Ontario old growth. I was scanning the Niagara Falls online digital library when I saw a photograph that has been burned into my brain to this day. It was labeled, “The Old Indian Trail - Marker Tree. Townline Rd. (at Thorold - Stamford)
Anyway, I was selected to take a picture of the man clan as two men had to bolt.
As Shannon is talking to the officers, a van comes rolling up to the location. As it passes by, it slows down to see if the woman the police are talking to is Shannon. Confident that it is, it comes to a stop and the side door opens up with armed individuals coming out. Seeing this unfold, Shannon realizes what’s going to happen, so she turns on her heals and begins to run. Before the officers have a chance to process what is going on, the members from the New World Power open fire, taking down both officers. One officer will die on the scene while the other has a chance of survival if medical assistance arrives on time.
I personally feel the second part of that question is the easier to answer: if you’ve got your message down, a good editor will make your words the best they can be.
Mayer RE, Aldrich TE, Earely CE. Effects of noise and electromagnetic fields on reproductive outcomes. Environ Health Perspect 1989; 81: 193-200.
Have a lovely Labor Day weekend, dears! Or, as I like to put it; Labor Day: the day that everyone takes off work. Because America makes sense like that.
* I began to wonder if I had DID, which was still called MPD at the time.
My Grandfather's idea of gardening however involves me spending what feels like neverending hours weeding and digging stinky compost into the soil!
Through the years of increasing affluence and motor vehicle registrations, the initial small parking areas gradually encroached upon lawns and playgrounds, and pressure arose from late arrivals to be granted equal accommodation privileges or 'rights'. Supervision and rationing of parking spaces became administrative nightmares. No parking charges were levied, yet the users wanted ever improved facilities - asphalt paving, reservation signs, engine heater, prompt snow removal and the like. Patronage of public transport facilities, of course, decline in the vicinity."
ROWAN OF THE MOOR is a Paranormal/Historical (with romantic elements) single novel of 100,000 words and takes place in fourth-century, Roman occupied Britain.
So that's when I walked back into the main room where all my fellow Spring Breakers were hanging out. I told them "yeah, I just got off the phone w/my Dad. I told him about my mad cocking skills."
in red-hot iron shoes.
A Parfait! I made this last spring, from this gorgeous fabric I bought in Paris. Like the cotton for my Cod Afrique Hazel dress, this came from Dreyfus in the Marche St Pierre and was only a few euros a metre.
He is a good eater and likes to graze most of the day as well as have his meals.
I am so morally conflicted.... Here we have a criminal who seems to understand the concept of justice, who seems to feel remorse for his crimes, who may even have partially reformed himself in prison, yet he still supports the Raiders.
know I’d once more lit the bulb and gone too far.
I got through work Thursday by finger-pecking with my left hand or dictating to Brigitte.
3. In a large salad bowl add the tomatoes and cucumber and toss in as many greek olives as you desire. If you don’t have greek olives then the recipe can work just as well with other varieties. I favour a mix between black olives and stuffed green olives with pimento.
Betty drops a whiskey and coke and an ashtray full of water in front of its respective drinkers before me and Moon quickly indulge. I hand Betty me fiver and she winks before heading off for my change.
How about you? Do you see yourself with a lot of different hats, or from time to time having to put on your “business” face, or “social” face? While it is probably okay to do that, what is not okay is not being able to admit it. Even worse, it can become ruinous to not even recognize it.
Filled with romance and adventure, Awaken takes your through a labyrinth of situations, every corner asking you if we're leaving our real lives behind when we enter the cyber-world.
It's funny really: my own tastes musically have diversified to the point of insanity over the last 10-15 years, but this band remains, for me, the kind of childhood remnant you just can't shake because your very ears seem attuned to their special brand of jangly sunshine. Can't wait to hear what they do next!
Is there a rehab clinic for squash addiction? Butternut Ford Clinic perhaps?
Frederick the Simple (Treasurer), Vagrant
Prepare yourself to see the unseen as you’ve never seen it before.
It is a powerful and disturbing book that just might save a reader's life.
taller than the houses on the block.
I called him “Da.”
Thanks again for stopping by and blessings on your weekend.
Government agencies are your only choice in some things and they know it. These agencies do not posses the urge to improve their service because the government knows that the citizens have no other choice, the citizens just have to deal with it. And even if they did have the urge the improve, it’s not that strong compared to private entities because they know that there’s no competition, they have the monopoly, people cannot simply turn to others simply because there is no other option for them. And with accountability, just think of the rampant corruption in the government and ask yourself if the state has any. So how does Anarchy sound?
There are guns on the streets, there are depraved individuals who wield them and until we decide that these problems are important enough to address as a society, until we stop thinking that the building of stadiums and vacant overpriced condos can prevent these occurrences, they will happen. We are a society, a community, and the problems that are left untreated will reach us no matter how hard society tries to push those problems away.
Our friends were already seated in the bar when we arrived with complementary nuts and olives in front of them, after a toss up between cocktails or G&T’s we decided on the later. Tanqueray Ten and Fevertree tonic for most and a Hendricks and tonic for me, served with cucumber of course.
Observers in the Reno-Sparks area of Nevada reported seeing a fireball at about 8 a.m. local time, accompanied or followed by a thunderous clap that experts said could have been a sonic boom from the meteor or the sound of it breaking up high over the Earth.
“Images, video and sound recordings of the Games taken by a Ticket Holder cannot be used for any purpose other than for private and domestic purposes and a Ticket Holder may not license, broadcast or publish video and/or sound recordings, including on social networking websites and the Internet more generally.”
Between them they are draining the power from the nation’s people.
We finally moved into our house on May 4th. Last night was the first time I'd even opened my computer since moving in. We've been a tad busy.
In the end, I was quite impress and swayed by Deep Church. The issue I have are minor and I like the way that Belcher is working to bring the positive of both extremes in the church debate together. I would love to hear from others as we work out the issues of worship and culture. Do you think Belcher found a reasonable middle point?
Toth's different, widely-lauded take on 9/11 deftly avoids jingoistic simple-mindedness, which mars many 9/11 works. Also, the fact that Toth was willing to write an ambitious and experimental novel is to be applauded.
You’re reading this book because you’re at least curious about social media. You probably want to know why there’s such a fuss about it, and you’d like to find out if it can help your enterprise. We’ll get to all these topics, but first, why should you care at all about social media?
It’s just such a great community for support and friendship.
What else.... oh yes, she's getting on the loo on her own. She's playing for longer on her own (although still needs a ton of encouragement). Her vocabulary is as amazing as ever. She's enjoying music more.
I had forgotten the depth of that vibration as it resonates in my chest, suffusing my body with a deep sense of calm. I swing onto your neat little back and we take off, blowing the winter cobwebs from us both. We take in all our favourite countryside routes, getting to know the curves and contours ready for another year. You’re silent again, just for a moment, when we stop to appreciate the brand new signs of spring.
“Do you really think, that you’re one of those girls, who thinks that some prince will come along, and be great to you, and treat you like you’re something special because you’re “different”? That’s laughable.”
CB is now offering skyscraper ad tiles measuing 120 x 600 pixels, as shown above! E-mail me for availability, rates and placement information. And don't forget, this new style is 50% off if booked between November 2010 and January 2011!
One study shows that acupuncture treatment may be effective in treating anisometropia, a condition in which one eye focuses much better than the other. Acupuncture can reduce the differences in refractive powers between the eyes so that both eyes can have similar image quality. This helps reduce the amblyopia problem. However, its long-term effectiveness remains unknown.
Best Coast are a lo-fi, surf-pop band from LA. They were picked as “New Band of the Day” by The Guardian back in 2009, and have received various other similar titles.
Barnsley as a Tuscan town: Surrounded by a wall wide enough to walk on, which lights up to form a halo. Looks unlikely at the moment.
I've returned from parts unknown, mes auteurs, and I trust y'all enjoyed last week's guest posts while I was gone. Many thanks to our five guest posters!
There were so many of such interesting sub-plots in the book and all of these open your eyes about some aspect of social situation and industry.
"What, ALL those books?"
“Oh! That’s an interesting name! Where’s it from?”
I’m in New Orleans sitting in a meeting listening to a man speaking to us about the city. For those who don’t know, New Orleans is far from a normal US city so it was very interesting hearing about the city, but it was one of the last things he said that caught my attention. He told us, “You’ve already done the most important thing that you will do here during your entire time in New Orleans.” Keep in mind he just said that to a bunch of people who had just arrived to New Orleans and hadn’t even done anything yet. Instantly I began to think, “What? How can that be?” He went to explain his statement and explained what was really important to New Orleans, showing them that you care. Work on someone’s house is temporary; it’ll be wiped away with the next hurricane or tropical storm, but the love the city feels from people coming to help them lasts. Throughout the whole summer I continued to learn more and more about what he really meant by that through meeting some wonderful people in New Orleans.
We have a family story about John Dillinger...sort of a case of six degrees of separation. I was reminded of it when the trailers started hitting the tv screen. It's nothing involved but still I giggle when I remember it.
We went to concerts. I did his homework occasionally. He was with me when I opened my car door into traffic and had it ripped off by a passing vehicle. I let him drive my brand new red car with a clutch after he swore he knew how to drive a stick shift (he did not). He laughs like mad when he tells me about the look on my face when he began to grind the gears repetitively to excess.
It appears, in the final verse, that the voice of mockery briefly takes a turn for the sympathetic, urging the protagonist to take solice in his friends or to essentially buck up his ideas and get on with his life, but this is dispelled in performance by the continued sarcasm and derision in Cohen’s tone, swiftly followed by the sneering you can find your love with diagrams on a plain brown envelope, which undermines the nostalgic view of romance evinced in the previous verse, and once again belittles the protagonist’s emotional state. The final verse serves to undermine previous themes several times, including ones expressed within itself; the “coupons” on the back of magazines are revealed as having been used up. Given their textual proximity to the act of talking to a friend it could be suggested that the coupons represent second chances, forgiveness in the eyes of others. That they are all used up would imply that the protagonist has pushed too hard too many times against the forgiveness of his friends.
School -- that all-consuming empire -- penetrates so deep into our culture, and so far into our cultural mindset, that it's helpful to remember that all that cacophony erupting from the current system masks some joyful sounds coming from a different quarter.
Last weekend, I was absolutely fucking determined that THIS CAKE WOULD NOT BEAT ME and I added my six eggs, the sugar, the ground almonds.....microwaved the 3 lemons (fed up with the boiling which takes aaaaages).... and put the whole lot back into the FIRST cake tin..... but THIS time I forgot to add the greaseproof paper base.
In Violet's life, there are too many losses.
I retrieved the great wealth stolen by my enemies
Do not try to be the fastest thing around when being as fast with less power is sufficient: meh, really do not care so much about the power thing
The photo is of the kids at Christmas, just so you know who i've been talking about.
Winning the Prop 8 case is Pyrrhic victory if it results in losing the war.
Furthermore, as soon as the City learnt about the open toilets, they attempted to enclose them. But the ANCYL wanted them open, because it suited their agenda. The 55 open toilets happened to be located in the precise area where the ANCYL's leading "thugocrats", Andile Lili and Loyiso Nkohla, conduct their reign of terror. Given the contradiction between the community's wishes and the ANCYL's actions, there is only one conclusion: the open toilets were a direct result of the ANCYL's intimidation in order to drive their political agenda.
Just a quick post to show off for you some roses I made for a friends fundraiser last night, so she could give them to some sponsors. The theme was "Mad for Plaid" and I had the good fortune of finding several different plaid patterned scrapbook papers. Now I am convinced that these roses look amazing no matter what pattern your paper has.
The case started a few weeks ago with jury selection. There appeared to be a greater chance of a conviction, as a result of Clemens having put forward his hypothesis of himself as a non user, than in the Bonds case where he was answering vague or open-ended questions with vague and open-ended answers.
surprise I found congealing there, so ripe and deep
Genetic Resources And Traditional Knowledge Case Studies and Conflicting Interests is edited by Tania Bubela (Associate Professor, School of Public Health, University of Alberta) and E. Richard Gold (James McGill Professor, Faculty of Law, McGill University). It's part of Edward Elgar Publishing's Intellectual Property and Global Development series, for which the series editor is the academically fertile and creatively prolific Peter K. Yu.
Although my husband thinks St. Patrick’s Day is all about shamrocks and an excuse to drink, I also think it’s another great holiday that I get to decorate for! I finally have some free time after spending weeks studying for tests for work (more on that in another post) and what do I want to do? Craft, of course!! So today during my lunch break, I went to Michael’s and picked up some supplies. This is what I came up with:
Book Passage
We don’t hear much from the Obama campaign about the Tea Party movement, but its power must surely concern them. On March 16, 2010 more than a million showed up in Washington to protest against the passage of Obamacare and returned in March 2012 to rally for its repeal. Not since the days of the Civil Rights movement and Vietnam War protests has Washington seen such crowds.
Now let's say that you've made the decision to cloth diaper. On day 1, you do the following:
Teague Ramos is a professional with his own security service. He plays bodyguard and keeps his past hidden but his new client will be making that hard to do. Teague will find Kate too attractive to leave alone but his one goal must be to protect her from her stalker.
Cut bread into 1 inch slices, leaving the very bottoms still attached. In a small bowl, combine mustard, butter, and onions. Spread mixture on both side of each slice of bread. Cut each slice of cheese diagonally. Place 2 triangles between each slice of bread. Cut the bacon in half lengthwise and widthwise. Lay one piece of bacon on top of each slice of bread. Place loaf on cookie sheet lined with foil. Bake for 20 – 25 minutes.
I was intrigued with the object in the man's right hand, which appears to be a whip and suggests an occupation involving driving a team of horses or draft animals. He was probably a wagon, coach or carriage driver. Marion's Showell ancestors were agricultural or brewer's labourers and farmers, so it seems likely that this man drove a wagon transporting farm produce or supplies for the brewing industry in Burton.
Without you there’s nothing to fight for…
Then this:
Anyway, cutting to the chase, Ricky Stuart got his wish; Cam Smith became the first player to be made an example of and was suspended for two games – including the Grand Final. Stuart’s Sharks were installed as favourites to defeat the battered and judiciary crippled Storm and make it through to the Grand Final. The Melbourne Storm came out and handed the Sharks – and Stuart – their own arses on a platter to the tune of a 28 to nil shellacking. Stuart came out and attacked the Storm for being ‘flips’, ‘wallys’ and other childish names after his opposite number dared to criticise the comments he had made through the week. Stuart’s team, which has waited for all of its 41 years in the comp to win a flag would have to settle for a shit sandwich yet again and the Storm got to travel to Sydney again to battle the Sea Eagles again for the 2008 title.
And quick and meaningless update:
They do deliver, but it's £6.50 delivery per box (or you can get up to 6 boxes delivered for the same price, but I have nowhere to store 6 boxes...or even 3 boxes because my house is so tiny!).
This is a large 8x8 card and is destined for a very special friend, I hope she'll like it. I'm entering it into CraftyHazelNut's Christmas Challenge where they are asking us to 'make a scene'
1-1/2 cups granulated sugar
The beers from Einstok brewery have the slogan Drink, Conquer, Repeat which sounds a little aggressive for a country annexed by Operation Fork. Anymore of that talk and we'll launch Operation Spoon I thought, but on looking closer I see they don't want to conquer so they can pillage, but to leave things better. Which is nice.
He rolls his shoulders and rubs the back of his neck; then, he walks quickly over to his locked closet and opens it with a small brass key. I’ll just deal with this last one; then, I’ll resign from this damm place…, get back to my research. Too old for this kind of frustration. Ah…, she’s a conniving lovely lady, he thought.
As part of the Kreativ blog award, you have to mention 7 interesting things about yourself. I have already done that here, and even though there are many more such “interesting” facts about me, I will not bore you with them, today.
Former Associated Press writer Polly Anderson contributed to this report.
Does it have to do with moon and star alignment? A life devoted to prayer and fasting? What is that unknown THING that draws tangueros to you? I don't want to hazard a guess of why they pick who they pick. All I know is that I could make a million dollars if I could invent a tanguera pheromone cologne that promised to draw tangueros to you.... "One whiff and all the best dancers in the room will run to your side and beg you for a dance." :
The military takeover, in other words, is something that cannot be nullified or cast aside by the actions of mere men. And Sanogo feels it is his divine right to occupy the position he now commands.
Since tryptophan is a precursor of other neurotransmitters in your brain, including serotonin and melatonin, eating foods that are rich in tryptophan will help you feel relaxed and sleepy. Foods such as turkey, hummus, lentils, and kelp are naturally high in tryptophan and also contain nutrients that provide a host of other health benefits. In addition, bananas not only contain tryptophan, but also potassium and magnesium, which are natural muscle relaxants. Fresh and dried cherries are also one of the only natural food sources of melatonin. Read more of my healthy diet recommendations by visiting www.dreliaz.org/recommends-diet.
Everybody knows about this study. I learned about it in high school and several college classes. So, knowing this information, what do you suppose happens when we tell kids “This is a fact, thin kids are better than fat kids.”
Above his changing table was a mobile made of origami cranes. Every time I changed his diaper, I would give the mobile a swing, and the paper cranes would swoop and swirl above his head. Jack made up a sign for “bird” that let me know he wanted to see his birds, or any bird for that matter. It was a little wave of the wrist, hand held high, and he did it OFTEN.
No excuses here just facts, hope no one leaves my blog and I appreciate your patience and cherish your wonderful friendship..Hope you enjoy this little poem I wrote a while back..
But above all else, it is where we of law enforcement remember our fellow officers who gave all, and that is the true meaning of Police Week.
What about you? Do you reconnect with your sources? Have you ever landed a source as a client?
-K Alex Henery didn’t have that good of a day on his longer FG attempts, missing to his left on a few of them. Strong leg, some kicks looked like they’d be good from 60, but accuracy was a little off today.
Eastwood’s performance of Harry Callahan is one that everyone knows about. His famous quote of “do you feel lucky” never fails to induce cheers from its viewers (again, no matter where they happen to stand politically/morally on the issue of violence). He’s a character that thrives on the pain of the criminal. The even more famous quote, “go ahead, make my day,” from the fourth Dirty Harry movie, Sudden Impact (and often wrongfully assigned to the original 1971 film), gives us even more insight into the character: here’s a character, a cop mind you, that enjoys the dirtiest aspects of his job; it would make his day for you to interrupt his hot dog and allow him to shoot you should you try to shoot him first (that kind of humor wouldn't really be introduced until Sudden Impact).
Ha ha ha---yes, I will die---but I'm not letting the Government or my ex-wife get my estate, so I do have a will--and that friends children get most of it
Second, somewhat humorous… as you progress, you may find that you stop experiencing those crowd-like emotons altogether and your impulses are fully in line with your own reading now. When it happens, your attempt to read YOUR impulses as a window in CROWD’s impulses may backfire as you start trading as a contrarian to yourself rather than crowd, eseentially becoming a part of a crowd again. OK, that was half-joke.
It has never been more important for companies to hold on to their employees. A high turnover of staff is a waste of valuable time and resources, as money is spent on recruitment and training. In the current climate companies need to do all they can to minimise this waste by holding on to their high performing individuals. So what is the best way to retain the talent in your business?
This Episode they must cover subjects from
First, there was Ramen Dojo, where sesame oil and fried garlic took the spicy tonkotsu broth to a whole new level of slurptacular (yes, I'm making that a word):
62. American Gangster (Denzel Washington & Russell Crowe)
Now that Christmas time is coming our way, it's always nice to illuminate your home with beautiful lighting.
What you think about is what you will draw into your life, dear one. You have the ability to be decisive now and to clearly understand what it is you want to achieve. Ignore the unkind intentions of others.
Sunday, April 1st the WWE presents WrestleMania XXVIII, or WrestleMania 28 if you don’t enjoy Roman numerals. It will take place at Sun Life Stadium in Miami Gardens and will be one of a very few WrestleManias held outdoors. Thankfully the weather will be wonderful, something tells me the same may not be said next year in New Jersey! Of course after this previous winter, it might be 75 degrees with clear skies in New Jersey next year. Who knows with all this global warming?!? Or are we still blaming El Nino these days? I can’t keep up. But I digress! Let’s get to the first annual Manertainment WrestleMania Preview!!!
He played with for bits of stone!
Playto, the Playosopher of Life at Loving U.
Tyee spinach (June-July?).
It was unbeaten. It came against an England team which re-gained the Ashes for the first time in almost 20 years against Australia just 12 months later. He captained the team and the West Indies had been comprehensively beaten in the previous three tests, getting bowled out for less than 100 twice.
January always starts out so organized and full of promise. I cut fresh veggies and put those in tupperware for the week. I packed healthy lunches, had fresh fruit, finished laundry. I even started using my own fabric warmer for my daily Starbucks Venti Awake Tea. I was ready for the week as I always am in early January. And it paid off. I ate pretty healthy, had low-stress morning, and time in the evenings for exercise and things. I exercised 5 nights which was my goal. But I know this organization doesn't always last past mid-January so I am taking note of what works. I realize if we grocery shop in the morning on Sunday, I am more willing to cut veggies than if we wait until later in the day to shop. I am paying attention to the things that will make it hard to keep this up. I did already lose my fabric warmer and have no idea where it is so I need to find that but the rest of the week went well.
So why would the Malays want to relinquish political power and lose all that is already theirs from birth?
I sure didn't take any pictures.
HELP A BROTHER OUT!
3. "River Runs Deep"
I've mentioned the bear sanctuary I'll be visiting later this summer several times recently, so imagine my surprise when pictures from said sanctuary began appearing on my Facebook news feed!! My friend Hoon, who is in the U.P. for a dental rotation, visited our friend Dustin's family owned bear sanctuary and posted some pictures from his visit.
I’ve written before about how shy I am around women that I’m attracted to. I’ve also written about how I think that this is at least in part due to my fear of being seen as just another male on the make. My guess is that this is somewhat common amongst us “nerdy” types, but my problem is compounded by the fact that, other than wearing glasses, I don’t fit the physical profile of your stereotypical nerd. As for what I’d do if I’d actually found the woman of my dreams…
WIE: In your book you even go so far as to suggest that the cosmos was created for our sake.
Some 50 rose bushes make their home in the gardens just outside Ashton House, and several are already blooming! This is the earliest I can ever remember them doing so! Here in Iowa, they don't usually bloom until early June. I spotted the first bloom on one a couple weeks ago.
INGREDIENTS -
Fair did I say?
"If we stay here, he'll grow up loving this place, and it's really very beautiful here.
"The flip side to obesity can be eating disorders," Mrs. Obama said. "I'm particularly sensitive to this because I have two girls. So one of the things we try to do in our home is not really talk about weight. I try to make it a point not to spend a whole lot of time talking about weight or MY weight, for that matter."
The mother-of-two opened the insurance business in 1998.
Tomorrow I am going to venture out of the house. I might even grab a cup of tea in a cafe, and possibly visit a friend. It feels a little like being let out of a caged place and I'm not quite sure whether I'll still be able to communicate!
Your hair is now down to your back and is super thick. We can even put it in a short little ponytail. Oh, it makes me so excited!
Long story short, I broke up with my boyfriend. It was harder than I thought it would be, but the relationship simply couldn’t continue. I’m trying very hard not to dwell on it, so I’m not going to make this post all about him. After all, that’s probably what he would want, right? Don’t give the enemy attention? Yeah, something like that…
I took the stack of hundreds from him and counted them. There were 10 one hundred rupee notes.
Booties: Clarks
"Future Plans". The forthcoming MARQUES Class 46 seminar to review and discuss the Study on the Overall Functioning of the European Trade Mark System which the European Commission commissioned from the Max Planck Institute will definitely be packed to the rafters. This event, which is free and carries 2.5 CPD points, takes place on the afternoon of Tuesday 5 April. When the registration list is full, which should happen some time in the next few hours, a reserve list will be opened so that any gaps left by cancellations can be swiftly filled. European trade mark organisation MARQUES has set up an online registration system -- you can check the programme and register here. See you there?
This investigation was part of Operation Predator, a nationwide HSI initiative to protect children from sexual predators, including those who travel overseas for sex with minors, Internet child pornographers, criminal alien sex offenders and child sex traffickers. HSI encourages the public to report suspected child predators and any suspicious activity through its toll-free hotline at 1-866-DHS-2ICE or by completing its online tip form. Both are staffed around the clock by investigators.
Me: "The song from The Little Mermaid. The one that was just on!"
How often do you clean out your closet?
* Small savings can add up, even those 25 cent coupons make a difference especially if your store doubles coupons! And an item is on sale!
Paper: Antique Cream Narratives by Karen Russell (Creative Imaginations), Cream and Dark Grey cardstock, Cream vellum
Product: This is an oil free gel that’s intended to be a spot treatment for pimples. It is for oily skin beauties but I can’t see why dry skin lovelies can’t use this as well. The aloe vera has moisturizing effects and when I use this my skin isn’t completely dried out. The sales associates at Lush rave about this all the time and they swear by it. I don’t actually swear by this as a spot treatment. I think it helps with time, like most skin care products but I don’t think it’s a miracle healer. I had a horrendous, painful pimple on my chin last week and I put this on for a few days. This didn’t make it go away any faster but it did soothe the pain a bit. I think because of the tea tree. So it’s definitely more soothing than it is a zit zapper in my opinion. I have better spot treatments to make the pimple go away faster BUT one thing I’ve noticed and love about this product is that is helps fade the scars that acne can leave behind with the help of aloe vera, witch hazel and grape juice (which is high in vitamin C which is a natural exfoliator). Whether you pick at it or not, the aftermath of a pimple is usually discoloration where the pimple was and if I do get the urge and start squeezing and picking I put this on and it heals it. It is not a fade gel whatsoever but I don’t notice a super dark mark when I use this. I don’t notice this working on older scars but it might. I just know this does help with fresh scarring. I also like this under my Cosmetic Warrior Fresh Face Mask. I put this all over my face first then apply my mask. Cosmetic Warrior alone is infused with tea tree to help get rid of acne and this adds extra boost, so I do see a bit of a difference in that my skin is more calm and the breakouts dry up a bit faster.
Lead counsel for the inquiry, Robert Jay QC, asked her about the frequency of text contacts between the two when she was head of News International.
It’s been said that “diplomacy consists of telling the other guy to go to Hell in such a way that he looks forward to the trip.” Rattling sabers and issuing ultimata may sound great, but it’s ultimately counter-productive in situations like the one Mali faces now. If ECOWAS leaders truly seek a diplomatic solution to Mali’s current political mess, they need to tone down the rhetoric and give Captain Sanogo and his men a face-saving way out.
Will Rose find true love or is it too late for her? Will she be able to live with the consequences of her choices? Did she have anything to do with 'The Silencing' of a family friend and neighbor? Rose's sister, Hen, found true love - but will she have to choose between her family & religion and her one true love? You have to read the book to find out.
(if you're new to the blog- or have just simply forgotten Maggie's stylist ambitions.... read this post: http://cbkohrman.blogspot.com/2011/04/good-and-bad.html) Let's just say that thank goodness I have a strong friendship with Geneva's parents, and we've been able to continue to be besties.... but I wouldn't recommend this situation to anyone that you even kinda like.
I don't know who she is, but the Meegenius narrator did a fantastic job reading the book as well. Can I also admit the fact that hearing her sweet, cheerful voice say, "Illustrated by Ingvard the Terrible" makes me laugh too?
I seriously had no idea there could be something so great in the world as reading a book to my kids that I wrote. I had no idea that the thrill of reading it to them could outshine the thrill I got writing it. From that moment, I wanted nothing more than to spend the rest of my life writing books that I could read to my kids. And that someday they could read to their kids. As I hugged them goodnight, I made a choice to embark on a journey I knew would be painfully hard and that would take me years and years.... and there was no part of me that wasn't okay with it. I've been living off that high ever since.
The original recipe is for a potato, pea and cauliflower curry, so I usually make it when we have a cauliflower plus our usual glut of potatoes in our weekly fruit and veg box (we always have frozen peas, not petit pois but the slightly larger ones, which you can get in excellent quality here in Britain). But as you can see from my pictures below, you can modify it to feature other vegetables.
I’ll have it by some time on Monday, for sure (unless I’m hit by a bus or something), but I’ll try for earlier. I just didn’t want you all to think I’d dropped dead or something, since rarely a weekday goes by without me posting something.
Soon after this event, this blog comment is addressed to me: Political signs are every bit as much a fashion accessory as a pair of cute shoes. Both get appreciated by people with similar taste (and either mocked or ignored by everyone else). There the similarity ends, however, because my cute shoes actually serve a functional purpose.--and of course, as someone who has been physically threatened for carrying signs, I was completely dumbfounded by this comment. (I still am.) When was the last time she was fined for wearing cute shoes?
When a government ‘prints’ new citizenships at a rate necessitated by mass immigration, it is attempting to create a new set of criteria for group membership. In effect, it is saying that the old criteria, evolved over a period of centuries, if not millennia, are to be rewritten by bureaucratic fiat, under cover of a smokescreen provided by meaningless boilerplate about ‘shared values,’ and ‘diversity.’ The timescale for this rewriting will be massively compressed relative to the initial evolutionary timescale, making gradual adjustment impossible. As this process advances, two things will become clear: the legal reality of the citizenship of the newcomers, and the utter incompatibility of at least some portion of them with the still deeply-entrenched membership criteria of the natives.
It also appears that the police are going to pursue this case more aggressively than seemed to be the case when the story first came out:
Thanks for following and go sign up and take a look!
Rebecca was young then, but she remembered that evening with precise detail. While her mother was massaging her leg, they approached a four way intersection. She didn’t see the blinking red light in time to stop, and as she slammed on the brakes, a semi-truck was passing through. Its loud horn was drowned by the sound of the rainstorm. The truck slammed into the front of the 1988 Pontiac Grand Am, forcing it to go into circles. The steering wheel pushed into Angela’s chest, killing her instantly. Rebecca was pushed into the front seat on top of Mabel. Both Mabel and Rebecca escaped with minor injuries.
The guys are drinking Jack and Coke, and the girls are drinking Jack Honey and Coke.
Cardstock in envelope is from Bazzill, the paper is the wedding line from MM and inside I also used SU cardstock. The butterflies are two different MS punches. I put some Star Dust Stickles on the smaller ones and some bling on the bigger one. The satin ribbon is from my collection and I got the heart at Söstrene Gröne. The tab is the SU Tab punch embossed with a Cuttlebug folder. Inside I used three different stamps from my SU Carte Postale set, stamped them with Versamark and then used pearlwhite emboss powder.
Eole Water modified your typical electricity-generating turbines to allow them to distill drinking water out of the air in a bid to help developing countries solve their water needs.
Instead of dwelling on his misfortunes, though, Block decided to give thanks for what he had — family, health, friendships, and spirit.
But sometimes, it is a little deeper and a little harder. A little more gut wrenching. The kind that steals your voice away. For some it is the inability to have children, a loss of a child, cancer....For some of my old lafayette friends (the high school we do ministry at), it was the news yesterday of their friend dying in a car accident. 20 years old. Their lives are altered. Her life was altered.
Bridgeport (downtown, downstairs)
Now those are just the memorable ones. Oh yeah, I also crushed my pinky in the front door of the post office because I was retarded and thought that just becuase there was space under the hinges, I should stick my finger in there. It was fine until someone opened the door and there I was, little 7 year old Cub Scout howling in agony and the poor broad coming out of the building had no clue what was happening.
1 head Romaine lettuce, chopped
1. Cross country
The give away is going to be epic! Zoh has hand embroidered a tote with her signature Raven print and I'm offering up a Brand new I Do Declare skirt in my new favorite fabric!
20ml milk (I used low fat fresh milk)
We've also had a couple of floods, a fair serve of rain, and not a lot of excessive heat, which is always a bonus here. I think we only put the swampy on twice through the summer, and only then because I must be getting soft :-)
a lovely gesture of fall
Ao decides he doesn’t want to pilot the giant again, for fear he’ll cause more damage than he’d prevent. On the way home, he and Naru are ambushed by Naru’s father and friends. They capture Ao and plan to use him as a bargaining chip in negotiations with Japan. The Okinawans also capture Elena in order to get Gen-Bleu’s attention, and warn them to stay out of their affairs. When an aircraft carrier-sized secret appears, escorted by a fleet of smaller secrets, Fleur and Elena engage it in battle. Both Bleu’s Ivica and Gazelle descend on the house where Ao is being held, with Gazelle ultimately rescuing him and flying him to the Nirvash, which he decides he must pilot so he’ll never have to apologize to the next generation for doing nothing.
One last thing to mention. I don’t recall the exact day, but it was a few days after we found Rob and after everyone had left and it was just my son and I in the house. I went to bed and awoke to the sound of my bedroom doorknob being turned, clicking and I always kept it locked out of habit. When I wake up I come to very quickly.
December 25
It is clear that you are not your mind, you change it all the time, but you are still you.
For our Ike story it is thankfully uneventful and lacking in excitement, just like I want it to be. We left on Thursday when they announced our zip code was part of the mandatory evacuation. We packed up Joy, clothing for everyone toys for a couple of days, the scrapbooks and the computers and headed to my Mom's house in Houston. The news was saying if you are in a mandatory evacuation zone to go further away, but we felt paying for somewhere to stay further away was not something we wanted to do, nor were we interested in leaving for long (at least until we knew more about the storm and/or our home). So we spent Thursday night and all day Friday waiting for the storm to come. Joy wanted to go home and asked a few times during the day Friday, but we just told her a big storm was coming and it was safer at GrandLady's. On Friday night before the storm was really here we lost power around 9:30pm and went to bed early. The actual storm hit at night, so Joy never had any fear through it, she slept like a baby! I slept most of the night, but woke up a few times to noises and howling winds. I believe the same is true of Rob. We woke up Saturday and spent all day Saturday at my Mom's with one short trip out to see my grandmother and her home. Everyone was well, and my sister and her home were also safe. Sunday we deicded to go ahead and try going home since we were anxious to hear/see anything about our home. Rob left first and then gave an all clear and Joy and I followed. At home we found 5 shingles or less off the roof, all 6 trees standing with many missing branches, but standing and our backyard fences down on 2.5 sides. Clean up began and we spent the next 2 days outside cleaning up the debris, playing with Joy and chatting with the neighbors. We got our power back on Tuesday, and have been trying to regain normalicy since then.
Around 500mls of Mushroom Sauce
The youth’s response to this volatile security situation has been especially refreshing. On Saturday, Dawn’s Nosheen Abbas wrote, “The youth of Islamabad is not sitting idle in the face of growing religious extremism and Talibanization in some areas of Pakistan. Even if individually some are trying to combat ‘Talibanisation’ in a manner they deem fit; and some are even finding creative avenues.” Abbas Saleem Khan, who organized a protest in Islamabad against the Taliban, told her, “By not joining in, you are literally giving the Taliban a free pass to allow them to walk into your streets and homes and tell you how to conduct your daily affairs. The heart of the matter is that we will stand up against the Taliban and steer this country towards the vision it was created for.” Nosheen Abbas also cited Amna Mawaz, a university student, who plans to raise awareness through theater, noting, “I figured after attending protests and seminars that no one will listen to you if you give a lecture but rather through something entertaining like theater. I think if you keep it light and yet have a meaning one can spread awareness about extremism.” On social networking sites like Facebook and Twitter, young Pakistanis have established groups, organized rallies, and mobilized others to speak out against extremism.
“Sssh, JP,” she soothed, “In the face of an obstacle which is impossible to overcome, stubbornness is stupid.”
Women's Barracks is an engaging pulp that mixes World War II events, mostly-female characters who read like real people - they were, though they were renamed - and those characters' romantic/idealistic pursuits.
According to Sharacholic, Pinterest has sent more referral traffic to websites that Twitter did in February this year.
according to their conscience. You have not succeeded in confiscating
So it's officially under way and I've got two potential trades that will help me along the way... I just sent off two emails with pics of stuff I'm willing to deal and hopefully I can pull in some nice cards.
Lamy are a company who pride themselves on design and innovation, and some, though not all, of their packaging matches that.
The father and his alcoholic friends say, “We’re having fun, aren’t we???”………Are we????
SINGLETON
DADT is a codified form of hatred and discrimination against people because of their orientation. It is unjust, it is evil and it is a policy that our President promised us he would end. President Obama asked us at an HRC banquet in 2009 to “hold his feet to the fire.” That is what we are here to do. Mr. President why did you appeal Judge Virginia Phillip’s ruling that DADT is unconstitutional? Why did you seek a stay to her ruling directing the Armed Forces to immediately stop enforcing DADT?
We made it through 10 miles.
Are we a product of our biological inherited characteristics (nature) or a result of the influences we absorb throughout out lives (nurture)? I believe how we are is due to a mixture of both nurture and nature and as a result our behavioural traits are not fixed. Whilst it is true that some things are dictated by genetics (for example race, color and many inherited conditions) your environment and the people in your life have a major effect on your behaviour. You are your own person, you have your own identity and make your own choices. The characteristics your mother or father display are not your destiny. Learn from other people’s experience, so you don’t suffer the same mistakes.
Descent from the ATA was strong; the ATA board of directors voted not to support the measures. ”ATA and its members value the time of our drivers,” ATA President and CEO Bill Graves said following the board’s decision. “However, federal intervention into this area would have significant impacts on the contractual agreements between carriers and shippers.”
As always, you really cannot expect that 4 months of your life will all be on a high note, and that being said, it’s been a roller coaster of highs and lows, most of the lows being illness – head cold related, or over-training injuries, and the highs being great workouts, healthy nutrition, and an overall feeling of accomplishment and success.
Recently, I “attended” another free lunch concert. Attended between quotes, because I was researching and looking for books, while the concert took place.
Gladys
The websites, which I am not goinq to link to because they are all confusing and lacking in anything that looks like administrative process, have nothing, naaaasink, on how to go about joining, or information for expats. A friend who had already navigated this told me to simply make an appointment and register with a doctor, and it will sort itself out there. Cool? Cool.
Food as Fuel
One day Raymond was invited by Charlie and was asked something about a favour for him, for passing time with Emily while Charlie's absence for a couple of days on his business. Raymond, hesitating to do the offer, admits the reason that he is the oldest friend for them.
And I imagine, or at least I hope, that my coppery little bundle of joy won't be under our roof much longer. It will be winging its way across the country somewhere, destined for romance and excitement. With its white stick pearls, garnets, periwinkle glass and deerskin leather to remind it of Mama.
After your primer coat is dry (I waited about 25 minutes, until it wasn't sticky) we can start our colors. Plan out in your mind roughly where you want these to start and stop. I chose to split the chair in thirds. Take your top color, in this case white, and start coating past the limit of your white section. You don't need to do the whole chair, since we will be painting over that. Remember, thin coats! 'Tis better to do many thin coats than to do one gloppy-drippy one. I did about 4 thin coats on the top half of the chair. If you do get drips or strange textures, just take your steel wool and gently smooth it out, and paint over it again.
Please visit Astri - she has a wonderful blog!
WAR AND PEACE is based on Tolstoy’s massive 1000+ page long book (a book I bought but have avoided reading—until now). As I have not read the book, I can’t say that the adaptation has justified the masterpiece or not. All I can say, however, is that I thoroughly enjoyed the hours I spent smiling, laughing and sobbing. I have never come across a period drama as meaningful as this one.
Papa and Lo flew back to the states today, leaving me a few pounds chubbier but sated with enough love to last until my visit home in December.
The fiery desert air cut easily through Peter’s rags. His tormentors had sliced open the soles of his feet and each step tortured him. The men in black masks took him down to the Valley of Judgment- that’s what they called it- three miles outside of town. Peter was scared, but he would not give his captors the satisfaction of his weakness. He began to sing the Te Deum, softly at first, but he grew louder as he got closer.
by Dr. Jeffrey Lant
May My Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ and God My Father, who loved me and in His grace gave me unfailing courage and a firm hope, encourage me and strengthen me always to do and say what is good, in Jesus Name! Amen!
I really liked it but it was a bit tight.
Today I realize that God’s Will simply means that I AM here to LIVE. I AM here to enjoy all of L.I.F.E. I am here as a perfect part of the experience of living and all that I dream and desire is already mine because it was given to me in the promise. God’s Will for my L.I.F.E. is simply that I enjoy and live my L.I.F.E. fully.
It's been well known that I am completely jealous and would love to go too. But we just don't have the money. So I had this crazy daydream that hubby somehow found the money and was gonna surprise me too. It was a silly daydream that I knew would not happen......until I saw the dining reservation confirmation his aunt had made and it said 4 guests instead of the three I knew about going on the trip- her two daughters and their one friend. (I'd let her use my email address to make ressies) And one was for one of my favorite places- BOMA!
1/3 cup cream (or additional water)
There were snakes in the open plan kitchen/dining.
This is an all night sipping beer or what I'll call a destination beer. This is something you can pull out of the refrigerator at 8, pour yourself a half glass, pop in a Netflix and drink while you munch on some cheese popcorn and keep the bottle on the counter and go back for more until it's gone. If you're more worldly than me you can pop it open, cut up some aged cheeses, crack open a book and keep going back for more until it's gone. I would recommend that you drink a bottle with a buddy because of it's 11% ABV. The ABV is presumably to blame for Chimpotle uttering the nonsensical line "this is the chili dog of the Double Wide" in reference to another beer about 10 minutes after we finished off the bottle of Rye on Rye. For the $12 it retails for it should be seen as a destination, the kind of beer you pop open for a night when you want to give your taste buds a workout and you don't mind getting a little drunk for that workout. Rye on Rye will be available at KC liquor stores on Monday the 22nd.
Jerome
Congratulations Gina!!!....please can you email me (Joanne) by clicking HERE and I'll pass your email onto Annette at The StampFairy to contact you on how to claim your prize of...
9. Dancing in the Street
Last place? Well, I did have some bad luck with my equipment. I managed to break the berger button less than a week before the championship. And once you change that (or any other part), nothing is really the same. Only two weeks ago I reached a score which would take me one or two places higher.
I am 20 and go to University do you see me rioting no this rioting cost England over 200 million pounds which I saw in the news so in a time of recession and these young people do this.
and he’s an idiot harasser
One day one of the Oracles said: ‘I will become bored with this game
PIPE over cooled cupcakes
try hard to take my bits of mess with me
I cry as I try to imagine what it must feel like to hear your own mother say those words to you. I pray that he understands I don't mean it. I don't give up.
The Dark Knight is nihilistic, cynical about the public perception of heroes, and very brilliant. It deserves all the accolades it gets for beig what I likely the greatest comic book movie both eeksand non-geeks alike can enjoy. Beware, though. My cynical self agreed quite often with the Joker’s cynical view on human nature. A scary thought.
"The sun is rising," Tom mourned.
Create a card using the above sketch as inspiration. You're not required to use TE stamps to play, but there's a bonus prize if you do! To be entered into the prize drawing you must link your card using the In Linkz provided below by Thursday, April 25th. And of course there are prizes that are up for grabs:
Best Supporting Actress: I said Bérénice Bejo. The real winner: Octavia Spencer
F Cooldanna® offers hours of cooling relief for hot conditions after the safe non-toxic cooling crystals are activated with water. Can be worn around the head or neck and reused mulitiple times. Reusable bag included for on the go use. ZANheadgear® exclusive designs. One size fits all.
While he checked his e-mail
I’d expose you to “UB40″
Yes, claims Sebastian Seung. If you feel like your personal connectome pattern is a bummer—causing you, for example, to have chronic anxiety or obsessive thoughts—Seung says you can probably change it by consciously “pouring,” in a willed fashion, a desired neural activity through your brain (just as water can slowly change the course of a creek bed). I suppose he’s referring to things like behavior modification therapies and habitually facing your fears directly.
Here is an embarassing story about myself. Not more than a few hours after my parents dropped me off at uni for the first time, I made a complete tit of myself because my male ego failed to stop me from making stupid decisions. I am still trying my hardest to forget that night.
Could they be following a plan first outlined by modern Freemasonry’s founder, Albert Pike?
1000 lilies x 2
The alternate rhyme scheme is also popular for this form: abaB, cbcB, dbdB. For those who do not like a strict adherence to rhyme, the second line of each quatrain may be unrhymed: axaR, bxbR, cxcR, dxdR, etc. with R being the repeated line.
Politicians love such a mindset because it gives them unlimited access to the nation's wealth through taxation for the purposes of exercising "compassion". This in turn gives them ever increasing power because each failure only demands more "compassion" when measured by intentions rather than results. To resist their political posturing is to resist their compassionate intentions, and what emotion based democracy is willing to resist compassionate intentions?
1. Combine ingredients thoroughly.
If my garden plants were in the least bit sensitive they would be a little put out by the fact that such a recent newcomer to the garden was being given top billing in the photographs today. But how could I not. I picked this cactus up, for what I thought was a song, at Lowes yesterday. It is an Echinopsis, Echinopsis subdenudata,' dominoes' and with flower buds it was an easy pick. I had no idea that it was to open this morning. David spotted it when he went outside. We enjoyed its brief bloom on our breakfast table. There are more to come. It's getting very crowded on the cactus and succulent fireplace!
so...now on to the positive part of monday morning! my girls having fun in the snow...well my big girls anyway :) miss maggie was not to thrilled about the cold and being wrapped up! for now i think she is happier playing in a warm house!
l. This section, with modifications, is taken from Administrative Circular No. 04-94 issued by the Supreme Court on February 8, 1994 for this purpose explained therein:
Not a whole lot to say about this one.
During 1949-51 he played periodically, with Red Allen and Lee Wiley, at Bill Green's Rustic Lodge in New Jersey - some live recordings featuring Red and Bobby are available on cassette. In the early 50's he held a long engagement at the Copley Square Hotel in Boston, played frequently at Child's Paramount, toured in the midwest, and also began his 'Music for Lovers Only' recordings, produced by Jackie Gleason. Over the next decade six albums were cut and heavily publicized by Gleason; Gleason and Bobby were often seen together on television. Bobby was also appearing on Martha Wright's weekly ABC-TV program. Aside from 'Lovers': supermarket and department store shoppers, diners, elevator riders, doctors' office visitors, and even people put on hold, could and still do enjoy the mellow sound of Bobby Hackett's cornet.
Spellbinders Grand Labels 4, ODBD Custom Die Elegant Ovals, paper flowers, Prima Burlap leaves, Toffee colored seam binding, Glimmer Mist in Pearl, lots of lace from my stash, Prima rhinestone flourish, handmade charm, Cheery Lynn Designs Exotic Butterflies Small, Tim Holtz ticket pins
- Tissue paper 2 ply 100′s or 3 ply 72′s $0.49 each Limit 4 (Royale) — $1.19 each after limit
Lois Weinberger
This weekend he enjoyed his first Father's Day. It was low key, but fun just to have him with us all the time!
I've never seen anyone else break shells like this, but I like it. It makes it kinda fun, trying to remove the biggest shell piece possible!
Today's photo is for sketch #74 at Sketch Savvy. I used two lousy photos and they even had crazy colors that I decided to embrace. Seriously, purple, yellow/gold, teal, white, black, and RED??? yep. I pulled out a bunch of kind of weird papers and they came together to work with my silly photos. It was pretty fun to just go with it. Give it a try and let me know how it goes.
Hunting these babies down will definitely be a challenge but when you want something that badly it'll fuel your search efforts. I have a dear friend studying abroad in Japan at the moment and I hope that she will be able to help me in my search for the rest of the set.
Not that it should come as a surprise, but Lotus ended two of the days at the top of the time sheets. A remarkable achievement was actually on day two when Grosjean lapped the Mugello circuit in his Lotus as did Kobayashi in his Sauber with the exact same time of 1:21.603. Both pilots were tied for the day’s fastest lap. Perez had a rough spell on the final day with limited running in his Sauber before retiring it into the garage as it smoked like a cheap Cuban cigar.
Is it love or is
In the last HAARP ring forecast .. we saw 9 out of 11 areas be hit with damaging winds, hail, and possible tornadoes. http://sincedutch.wordpress.com/2012/04/22/4222012-circle-and-sawtooth-sweeps…
and a sideways view,
she tried to navigate for me
(Even longer.)
But then I entered high school and began to be friends with people who didn’t live the right life at all. In fact, they didn’t even care about what the Bible said! I didn’t know how to have conversations with people who didn’t honor the word of God as perfect and authoritative. For the first time, I wasn’t ending the conversation. They were.
A total of $6,746 was raised at the inaugural tournament, and 100% of the proceeds were donated to our local disaster relief program.
An anecdote like this does not, however, make a case for walking in the streets with reckless abandon, jay walking, and other pedestrian transgressions. Or walking up the center of Broadway in rush hour traffic, as seen in the photo.
In any well-ordered capitalist society, such “borrowers” would be given one final and very brief interval in which to make repayment. If they were to repay, our purchaser must content herself with an alternative new home.
Ok so I haven't posted in way too long and I feel like I owe everyone an explanation of why I have been gone. I decided to tackle making some jewelry as a gift for someone, and well, I got addicted to it! All of my Christmas presents this year ended up being handmade jewelry and everyone loved it. Unfortunately my nails have taken a beating from the jewelry making. I am no longer able to paint my nails except for special occasions because it just gets ruined too fast.
Melchione also said that it is important to be well rested.
I really liked Biology class. We had Mr. Ewusiak, and we were always doing neat things. I remember on one occasion, I saved a life. I really did. Gary L. was sitting beside me and we were discussing blood types in class. We were getting ready to prick our finger, and test to see what our blood type was. I pricked mine and squeezed my finger to make the blood come out more. Gary watched me first before he did his own. Well, except that he never got the chance. Gary fainted. On me. He leaned over like a lowered drawbridge right onto me. If I hadn’t been there, he would have hit the floor full weight. So, I guess I saved his life. I’m like a hero.
The Commission went on to assess just how our society would be impacted from an EMP event, including how well cars and trucks can handle the burst of electromagnetic waves.
I was planning on wearing the juju shirt on my long 20-mile run and couldn’t afford anything holding me back, like juju or black magic. Based on the run on Sunday, the jury was still out.
Tallow Acid – See Tallow.
to acknowledge the state of my soul
How big is it?"
notebook
I'll end with a few details to support the above claims, though there's so much more packed along these lines packed into the film that it could (and probably will) provide material for a fair number of academic dissertations. The title Margaret comes from a line in a Gerard Manley Hopkins poem read to Lisa's class by a literature teacher (Matthew Broderick) who, like a police detective in the film, eats his lunch at his desk. Lisa's mother (J. Smith Cameron) is a stage actress by profession, and we're privy to a realistic look at how tumult in her personal life informs her performances, and vice versa. Her new suitor (Jean Reno) is an opera lover, and the film's final scenes takes place at a performance of Offenbach's Tales of Hoffman. It masterfully demonstrates that sometimes sharing an experience in a theatre can be the best way to honor the loved ones we have lost, and strengthen our bond with a loved one sitting in the seat next to ours.
Luckily, for the most part, I do believe the writer as I can see it. The work might still not be right for me but it's strong enough that the offer is probably real.
Take a look around you from where you sit. You will notice that everything in the room is “made”: the walls, the upholstery, the ceiling, the chair where you sit, the booklet you hold in your hand, the glass on the table and countless other details. None of them happen to exist in your room of their own accord. Even the simple loops of the carpet were made by someone: they did not appear spontaneously or by chance.
I'm pretty sure that if I just cleaned the ring really well, it wouldn't be pink anymore. I can't imagine that the diamond itself has been dyed, just some soap scum or dirt or something on the surface of the diamond has been dyed pink.
Watershed Report education programs reach several thousand students each year and teachers use the Watershed Report video series to teach sustainability concepts in their science and civics courses.
In 2011, MasterCard shares gained 70.78% while Visa gained 47.71%. However, as of date MasterCard as only increased 5.19% and Visa brings up the rear with only earning .11%. Some analyst predicted this turn in the market downgrading both the stocks from”neutral” from “buy.” They argued their reasoning was that the shift to credit and debit cards from cash has slowed. “During the 1990s, spending on cards exceeded overall consumer spending by about 9%. During the most recent decade, this slowed to about 6%,” the report states.
we’re not lead by just any jack ass
But also – don't put your editor’s hat on too soon. In the early drafts, your imagination should be in control. Don't worry at this stage what anyone will think. There’ll be plenty of time to revise and rewrite later.
The other day, I had to tell a sweet but ineffective teacher that she wouldn’t have a job next year. I came home and cried. While there isn’t room in the classroom for ineffectiveness, it breaks my heart to be the one to shut a door.
She had to reach all the way to the back of the bag,...inside the loaf,.. to get the other end piece.
I have seen many references on the web to using commercially available soap, grating it up and melting it in water and adding some glycerine to thicken...I went through the whole process of trying this method, but using my cold processed soap instead, and it failed completely! I even tried whipping the liquid with a a hand-held blender and it didn't thicken at all...
Friday 4th May 2012 - Colette Patterns Rooibos dress, Irregular Choice Flick Flack shoes and Cath Kidston satchel
Here, when he was 22, emerged an idea that would become a key to understanding Obama the politician and public figure. “Without a class” meant that he was entering his adult life without financial security. Without a “structure” meant he had grown up lacking a solid family foundation, his father gone from the start, his mother often elsewhere, his grandparents doing the best they could, but all leading to a sense of being a rootless outsider. Without a “tradition” was a reference to his lack of religious grounding and his hapa status, white and black, feeling completely at home in neither race. Eventually, he would make a few essential choices in terms of how he would live out his personal life, moving inexorably toward the black world. But in a larger sense, in terms of his ambitions beyond family, he did not want to be constricted by narrow choices. The different path he saw for himself was to rise above the divisions of culture and society, politics and economics, and embrace something larger—embrace it all. To make a particular choice would be to limit him, he wrote in the letter to Alex, because “taken separately, they are unacceptable and untenable.”
The kids finish lunch, wash up and head to the sand-box. We seem to be missing a plate. I decide it must be in the dishwasher already. I grab my sandwich and have a seat..right on a plate of apple-sauce! I found the missing plate?
If you have more than one book here's what you do:
It's fine and dandy that he's dead. Oh well lets look back for a minute. or a few minutes. or maybe an hour. or two. and lets look at why he, and others, planned the attacks that took place three days after my birthday... 9/11. Oh yea that's right. Our messed up foreign policy!
Last time when I got my first ultrasound with Laken she was all over the place bouncing here and there, but i think i ate some cheerios with sugar. This time Baby Bean was calm and was willing to work with us for the most part measuring was hard BB liked to stay curled up, I stayed away from the sugar breakfast this time.
Already, he’s acknowledged to teachers, through an e-mail, that he can do a better job of communicating with them. That’s a good start.
I won’t be cleaning the carpet either. Mud from allotment boots in the hall gets walked onto the carpets as soon as someone walks in there in their slippers. I won’t be down on my knees shampooing the carpet, I won’t be washing it when I spill coffee, I won’t be hoovering and there is NO FUCKING WAY I’ll be walking around in my socks. I have very little circulation to my feet and I’m not pretending that ugly carpet has made Annual Warm Foot Day a daily event just so my mum doesn’t have to spend as much time cleaning the carpet.
High unemployment, economic uncertainty and low incomes are among the reasons cited for the drop in Spanish investment.
Grass Widow charmed us from the outset. Their debut album for Make a Mess was a gnarled, propulsive record tempered by the silky punch of the three shared vocalists' honeyed coos. It was the kind of debut that felt instantly part of the musical lexicon, somehow classic and fresh on equal levels. On their latest, Internal Logic, the ladies are doing things for themselves; having started their own HLR imprint and self-releasing this LP after a string of anticipatory singles. The album picks up where their Kill Rock Stars sophomore stint left off and it’s knotted in the same post-punk push-pull of throb and strum that has come to epitomize their recordings. Those honeyed vocals are still in for the ride as well, and the trio harmonizes so perfectly it’s easy to get swept away in the sunshine state of mind that seems to blow in their wake. Internal Logic feels stronger and more confident than its predecessor, both more accessible and more complex but as with all Grass Widow albums it’s the effortless breeziness about it that makes it so enticing. The album is available below from HLR and we highly recommend picking it up.
fresh ground pepper to taste
- i read more non-law school books than i can count. ahhh, how i missed reading for enjoyment. scarpetta, by patricia cornwell, the lincoln lawyer by michael connelly, and the mockingjay by suzanne collins were probably my top three that i read.
Many of you will be dealing with old issues related to taxes, debt, insurance matters, or anything to do with inheritances and jointly held property. Another issue that could be on the table is the challenge of dealing with other people's values, especially when you completely don't agree with them! ("What can they be thinking?") You have a modern, egalitarian view of the world. Sometimes you're amazed and even horrified to see how stuck in the mud other people are. (Whaat?) I suggest you use this time to your advantage to clear up loose details with shared property, inheritances, taxes, and debt. Instead of being stalled in the water, rev that Mercury engine, and go places!
garden plans
The Haves have the money, has the power, and have too much political power to buy our politicians and our Democracy. Is anyone asking why nothing gets done in Washington? Because the HAVES like it that way! Until there is Banking Reform, Tax Reform and Trade Reform, nothing in America will change. And I don’t think the Haves want large and sufficient modification in Banking Reform, Tax Reform and Trade Reform. Big corporations sit on $2 Trillion holding back the money as they wait for the 2012 elections, while the American economy slows and the 99%ers suffer.
Following the riots of 1967 the politics of blame ensued as did the politics of handouts and the politics of poverty.
Now that I have been living alone for sometime (soon to be over as R is joining me in a day or so), my grocery list has a..how to say it...' longer shelf life'. That is good. And not so, as well. You see, if I buy something, then I must come up with recipes to use them (I am a compulsive cook. I cannot exist without venturing into the kitchen. Just 15 minutes with all the flavors and the stress just drains away). And that means having to find ways of making so called ' incompatible' ingredients marry each other.
Misunderstand
A friend of ours gave him this chicken hat as a joke (I think!) but Noah wants to wear it everywhere and now that it's getting cold, he insists on wearing to school... and, as his teachers informed me, wearing it DURING school.
Paired with Galaxy, California, 2008
The people in low income countries, according to Lagarde and Okonjo-Iweala, want to see an end to the corrupt financial havens that allow corrupt officials to steal public money and stash it abroad. They submitted that the impunity for this type of global crime can no longer be tolerated: ‘Abuse of public authority for private gain is not acceptable’. They added that there is the urgent need to foster openness and transparency in financial transactions and to ensure accountability at the global level.
Have I told you lately how I miss you
Michael: Communication skills. “I can negotiate for trading of sticks and firewood.”
1 1/3 cup quick-cooking oats
On the bright side of the dark side, he says that all the emotional pain and the fact that I self-injured indicate we are on the right track. We are not working on a decoy. He's proud of the fact that I didn't hurt myself worse, even though I spent a lot of time pondering doing so. And he's proud of me for telling him that I injured myself instead of hiding it.
Fun: 4/5 – A fun outing but probably not a regular deal (there’s only so much you can learn about beer).
“Erm, I have not even..” I protested, but he cut me off “you were about to suggest we begin by sifting through this establishment for clues or tracks”
So afraid to break the spell
“Atos get millions to get it right. It’s about time they were made to compensate the taxpayer.” Atos are contracted to re-assess people claiming benefits. Heart attack victims are among those assessed as well enough to work.
After seeing that, though, I really wanted to watch “Castle in the Sky” – I’ve put it off until I get this review done, but it’s solidly on my Friday night to-do list now. The last battle of the first segment was much less moving, featuring two people I’m not so familiar with – Itoda-san (井戸田） the comedian and IZAM (who looked like he was a glam rock type – not my style). The song was “すみれ September Love”, and it wasn’t any great test of singing ability in the first place (though it’s definitely a good karaoke song). There are Johnny’s juniors who can sing better than Itoda or IZAM, but one of the two definitely embarrassed himself.
is the major manufacturer of MSG
1 jump
It’s been so long since I have been in a season like this that I forgot how the attacks of my enemy would be. He has sent out his minions to try to bring me down. Since Wednesday it’s been bad around here. I came to a point last night when I had to cry out for help from some ladies who have become like sisters to me. Once the key questions were asked and the answers given, I was able to pray and ask God to fill the house with His Spirit and tell the minions to get out. This morning when I opened my eyes I prayed over the house and it’s occupants. Thankfully today has been much more productive and less full of strife.
Only flapping in the wind?
“Yes, of course. The battery unfortunately died on the way here.”
That in itself is worthy of celebration on this very celebratory Day-888 -filled-with-balloons-public-holiday -Monday.
on my neck as i return, and
I just thought I'd share a few really great things that showed up here at Christmas time.
1/4 cup stuffed pimento green olives, chopped
would be this different.
We really liked this dish - I must say, it's a keeper I rate all of my dishes on a scale of 1-4 with 4 being the absolute best and this one earned 4 rolling pins The sauce was delicious and with the extra shredded cheese I added, it had a lot of flavor. i always think it's great to have a vegetable in a casserole especially if there are children involved.
He's dynamic as an oak, but mobile. He towers over suburbs, looking for
confirms break up with 27 year old gym instructor
With a population of more than 250 thousand people, Bergen is Norway’s second largest city.. Bergen Public Library presented the following statistical facts in its annual report for 2010:
And Rick do you know why it’s 20K more, because half those jobs are union. And I hate to tell you this, the goddamn unions are the enemy. They are more corrupt than any business they were formed to oppose and have rigged the system to encourage the most corrupt, most overpaid, most under-working, most useless bunch of steady Democratic voters in history. If you let the free market determine salaries and not unions backed by their corrupt lawmakers (yes, Rick, I mean you) then manufacturing jobs wouldn’t pay that much. That’s why companies leave America, there is no reason to pay someone 20K above the average for a job that requires no education. Like Obama, you’re trying to pick winners and not let the market operate itself. If you knew the first thing about economics you would know that never works.
Jane looked at the deep green water beyond the breaking waves. "Good bye Greenwitch," she said softly."
menacing and distinctly no-nonsense. Scenes depicting Thor’s rampaging through SHIELD operatives whilst being sized up by Hawkeye (Jeremy Renner) take on, rather than the air of overloaded franchise service, aspects of a broadening world that the characters barely yet understand, even if it all still only serves essentially to soak up screen time that could be better spent deepening the angst of its suddenly mortal and bereft hero, and giving the villain’s aims and motives clearer attention. Nonetheless, whilst Branagh doesn’t make much of the mostly by-rote action set-pieces, surprisingly for the guy who did the still startling Agincourt battle of Henry V (1989), having a director with a genuinely developed sense of dramatic nuance permeates the film in finite ways to make it look, feel, sound more solid and, consequentially and contradictorily, thus more fantastic.
Merseyrail services experienced delays over lunchtime today. This was because of animals on the railway at Ainsdale.
Honestly, I don't feel that relieved to have graduated. Mostly because I thought I'd be smooth sailing at this point with a good job and a pretty good life lined up for myself. Sometimes life throws you curve balls.
- And don't forget to drink beer. But only if it's in a circular bottle or glass.
So why is anyone questioning the act of praising?
Paula Deen is your eccentric aunt who acts like a nice southern lady until she comes out with some naughty joke. She wants to feed you and feed you a lot. There is something very familial about her. She wants to remind y'all that she's from the south though.
With the risk of sounding pessimistic, I very much doubt that it was Mandela’s idea to take this strategic approach. A man of that age does not change his views so suddenly, without being counselled and pushed by other forces, --- must likely those who had substantial investments in South Africa. The Springbok captain was also schooled well by those operating behind the scenes. Seconds after the final whistle blew Pienaar, still breathless, was on the touchline for the post-victory live television interview.
Guinsoo: You’re right. Get him a Teemo plushie, stat!
Elections
John Jeremiah Sullivan’s Pulphead
CALLER: OK. Last night -- good example -- we had a neighbor come over, and this neighbor -- when every time he comes over, it's always a black comment. It's, "Oh, well, how do you black people like doing this?" And, "Do black people really like doing that?" And for a long time, I would ignore it. But last night, I got to the point where it --
Now the rules of the Liebster award stipulate that I need to nominate 5 others who are also deserving of this badge of honour, but in true Cranface tradition, I will completely disregard the rules of the award game and go my own way like the crazy renegade I am. Without further ado, I present The Second Totally Made Up Cranface Blog Award Extravaganza. Three awards for three different blogs, and the winners are:
Remember Fame Academy? Well, forget the over-scripted Cowell wannabe Headmaster and remember that they let the students play instruments and showed footage of them noodling around on pianos and doing some song writing. This idea borrows a bit of that.
As far as getting the film into production, it was surprisingly easy once I found the handful of people who were committed to the project. We had a very small crew, only about five us.
Today is the last Music Monday before the Third Day concert! I am so excited about the concert and getting to meet the band before the concert.
Hi everyone, I know Wednesday is usually reserved for my design post, but I am being lazy as I have the flu.
The Wicked Games of a Gentleman
If attending yoga classes can be so beneficial, it follows that by bringing some yoga practices and attitudes to the workplace we can avoid some of the negative effects of workplace stress and a sedentary lifestyle in the first place.
grapes; steamed
I’m not sorry I met you
Smart, economically sound customers are good customers. When all the other customers have maxed out their credit, your stable customers will go the distance.
The book opens into Adam’s memory of a pivotal moment in his life—the summer of 1942, where, as a young boy he is about to begin school, learn English, and thus take his initial tentative steps away from his German-speaking Mennonite family and their self-imposed cultural and geographic isolation in Northern Alberta. At chapter’s end his mother’s plaintive call echoes through the evening, and the decades, summoning his childhood self to dinner or bed. It’s a call home, as well, to one who may have lost his way. “A-a-da-a-am,” she cries, “Where a-a-re you?”
30. Ten Feet Tall and Bulletproof -- Travis Tritt
You look so gorgeous in the moodlight
so now I deeply understand flea market is cool
“He has missed the opportunity,” he told a post-Bersih 3.0 rally forum themed: “428 & Media Freedom – Awakening?” organised by civil rights group, Suaram.
Charter Schools Are a Net Negative:
They abandoned the God who made them and rejected the Rock their Savior. Deuteronomy 32:15
I'll close with a recent, random quote from W.B.--out of nowhere, on the way home from school on Friday, W.B. said, completely to himself, "The monkey screaming noise is getting in the way of my thinking."
This is the kind of business I'm trying to be a friend in. This is the kind
82 Sluggo Win on UCLA: defeat at the hands of anthropomorphic embodiment of all that is good in America, followed by utter ruination via crossed proton pack streams, or, as Vinz Clortho would’ve put it…
All signs were pointing to a great meal.
reimbursements (which are not
Edmondson: It was in a way, but it’s probably like childbirth — there’s some kind of drug in your body that makes you forget the horrible bits. I love doing it, it’s a fantastic thing to do. It’s like being given a huge box of paints and being allowed to paint on the walls. It’s a childish joy.
Springfield, MO 65807
What seems odd is that only the handsomest, most healthy looking young men appear to be in need of Cialis or Viagra, and only the most alluring, sexy and healthy looking young females have genital herpes, regularly using STD meds.
Or you can add designs from other cartridges, whatever you want.
So please spread the word about May 21. The idea is to get our kids to a local park, so they can meet other local kids, at about 10 in the morning. That way, instead of me bringing my kids at 11 and you bringing yours at 3, they won’t miss each other.
"Taslin laughed." Dora's expression was so alien on her face that Rel, catching a glimpse out of the corner of his narrowed eye, had to look again to be sure. She was actually simpering. This from the woman who shouted at Pevan and Rel all their childhood at the faintest hint of a smirk.
Hmm, let’s not get carried away too soon. We’ve done that too many times this season already. Even Mancini claims the title race is “finished”, but the hint of cunning mind games could not really be lost in his astute Italian manner. Not sure if it was a joke, but 79 goals into the season and he says “it is important to score a goal, if it’s possible”. Right.
To catch up on the day’s news
A few weeks ago, in preparation for the new movie, Dana and I watched the 1984 edition so that we could do a comparison. Of course, the 80's movie is very, well, 80's and we were not too sure what to expect going into the new one and were very pleasantly surprised. Below we present: Footloose vs. Footloose.
Thank you Annie Bell for allowing me to 'help out'.
The quilt pictured was my Queensland Flood Relief auction quilt. The appeal raised over $99,000 for flood relief in 2011. My quilt raised $50, it was great to be a part of the solution.
I'm thinking something like £50-99 for students, £99-150 for NGOs, and £250-350 for companies. Thoughts?
I have actually gotten phone calls from Boy and Margaret a couple times since I’ve been back. They are doing well, and Boy is excited to begin school this next year. I love that little family so much, and I love that God, again, used someone unexpected to work in my heart and soften the hard areas I thought I could hold onto. Love has a whole new meaning since my time in
The news publisher launched a HTML5 web app and pulled its iOS app off iTunes Store in mid-2011 but left the iOS version usable by subscribers with it already installed.
The first bloom looking back,
The best part for me was watching Aislinn grow. Throughout this series, she’s been tough at times, but mostly she’s flopped about trying to figure out her new role while keeping her true love with her. That’s pretty tough to do with the sexy and worldly Keenan tempting you and evil fae trying to kill or unseat you. But when both her love interests seemingly abandon her, she’s had it. And she takes action She’s determined to get her court back in order and to sort out her love life — no matter what. Yes, at times I found both Keenan and Seth exasperating and wished she’d dump both of ‘em (ditto for Donia), but in the end, Ash stays true to herself, as do the other characters.
In any case, there is general acknowledgment that print is a vital medium. Industry respondents believe more newspapers (82%), magazines (74%) and books (62%) will be read digitally by 2020 than in print. However, as the revolution moves forward, many logistics remain unanswered.
Congratulations to Melissa Waldorf!
As the owner of the house, privileged to have such a man as Jesus choose your house to preach in and then to question why someone would be ripping apart the roof. Did he get mad?
Boots: White Mountain, gift
links to the kitchen
Distributed by GSC Movies, The Lady will be released in selected cinemas here and in Penang, Ipoh and Malacca on May 3.
I am thankful for this opportunity...
Kiyoshi Suzuki, Producer
*I'm loving that I got a good nights sleep last night. Melatonin does this girl good.
Keith scrambled to his feet, intent on repaying the blow that had just been given. The two men circled around each other, hands balled into fists. As they both lunged for each other, Kira cried out, “Oh would you stop?? Idiot men…” Both men paused to stare at her, and she bodily dragged Ryan away. “Just give me a minute,” she offered to them both.
My writing has collapsed into a litter of consonants and vowels that drift across the carpet to clutter in the corners ( how I love alliteration). My novel remains buried somewhere in the recesses of my computer awaiting the final polish from my magic duster. An idea for a series of inter-related short stories remains eleven pages of an idea for a series of inter-related short stories.
Born in 1976 in Dallas, Texas, Amy Acker was destined for show-business from a young age. She spent her childhood studying ballet, modern dance and jazz dance, but knee surgery in high school forced her to abandon that path and turn to acting.
Loaded up the slingshot and let one fly
So, let me back up. About two months ago, I watched the documentary "Including Samuel." It definitely had me sold on inclusion, and had me convinced that I should join arm in arm with my fellow moms of children with disabilities, and fight the good fight. The view is that this is somewhat of a "Second Civil Rights Movement" I was geared up and ready to challenge all who passed me. About a month or two ago, I attended a small (free) seminar on Inclusion at the ARC. It was a great meeting. The presenter was very knowledgeable based on her own personal journey with her son, and everything there was extremely black and white. I left thinking that full inclusion (with support) was the only way. Someone actually asked if the presenter thought there was ever another way. She basically said no, if the district is equipped with the resources to make it happen.
I am still trying to recover from the chills I had all over on Saturday night when I saw Les Miserables at the Fabulous Fox Theater. It was, in a word, INCREDIBLE! My parents gave me 2 tickets for Christmas and it was one of the best gifts I’ve ever received. I love musical theater, and Les Miserables is one of the most beautiful compilations of song in the world. In fact, I not only was covered in chills, but my heart was racing, it took my breath away, and tears filled my eyes several times. It is that good!
Maia's class made mini pumpkin pies...hers made with tofu instead.
43. What were you doing at 12:00 last night?
What happens when we're as good as we're going to get, and danced with everybody we want to--over and over again?
I am sorry I won’t have the bavarian cream recipe for you, here’s a link to the one I used from the Food Network, but it really is a bunch of steps with pretty precise timing so I didn’t have the hands to take pictures while I was doing it. I REALLY, STRONGLY advise you NOT to take the shortcut a lot of sites tell you to with cream cheese and pudding. Not only does it sound gross but the bavarian cream is so worth it when you make it from scratch and really just requires attention to detail and making sure you’re prepared with everything you need before you begin.
Get over it right? Ho hum.
When James Buchanan became president in March 1857, he was determined to assert federal control over Utah Territory, where most of the residents were Mormons. Buchanan dispatched a brigade of 2,500 infantry and artillery troops for Salt Lake City under the command of the infamous General William ("Squaw Killer") Harney, who had a reputation for harsh methods. The troops were to establish a federal garrison in Utah and provide support for the new non-Mormon Utah Governor Alfred Cummings, who had been appointed by Buchanan to replace Young.
My experience in the Basic Program probably made me seem plausible as someone with whom the President of Rosary College could fill a sudden vacancy in her Political Science Department. It also probably made me seem plausible as someone who could serve, six times each semester over two years, as a commuting visiting professor in the Politics Department at the University of Dallas. The contacts developed in the Basic Program contributed as well to my professorship in Loyola’s School of Law.
*Most of my information came from the TMZ website in case you are interested in looking more into this.
*one winner will be picked the following day.
The old cansin looked over his shoulder as he opened the door to the bedroom back at the tiefling as she slept soundly. He exited the room and made his way down the hallway back to the den where he went through the desk and found an old book which he blew the dust off of. He then settled down in the chair and opened it up, “There has to be something here about that blasted group below Cauldron…” he mutters and began to read.
Sub-Total: RM131.50
‘Women themselves always still have in teh background of all personal vanity an impersonal contempt– for “woman.”–’ (before Korzybski)
A few of my favourite buys this week have been some Canmake products. If you're not familiar with Canmake, they're a Japanese brand which is affordable and available in Sasa (which is so much better than Boots/Superdrug back home!).
I learned that her son-in-law is way too interested in dogs for his own good and sounds like a real dick.
It's been raining for, like three days straight, and this morning i woke up with a sore throat.
Over the course of the last year, the Bartolomeo family had been building the 3600 square foot replacement to its former Palisades Park store — which now resides on Dean Street in Englewood. As many of you are aware, Englewood is home to Jerry’s Gourmet, another large Italian grocery store. I had been wondering what Carlo Bartolomeo was going to do to differentiate himself from the incumbent Italian mega-grocery, and now I know what it is — prepared foods.
Yes America is having some hard times, but it’s not that bad is it? In New York where the crime rates are much higher than in Florida, this proposal is not on the table, even though the residents needs some form of protection. It is not legal for a resident of New York to own a gun, however the criminals have them. How fair is that? A business owner cannot protect himself, and a married couple strolling in the part cannot protect themselves and run the risk of getting shot by some unruly thug. Why does the South have to be so notorious for their gun control issues?
Our Pastor, Marc Lawson, has dedicated all 5 of our kids. Here is everyone praying a blessing over Grant. He was so happy as always. We gave him the nickname "Smiley" as a baby because he was so joyful all of the time.
Preheat oven to 500˚F/ 250˚C (if using a pizza stone, place in oven to pre heat as well)
–Publishers Weekly
In the bowl of your electric mixer (or with a hand mixer), beat the butter and remaining sugar until light and fluffy (approximately 3 minutes). Beat in the vanilla extract, egg yolks, and lemon zest. Beat in the ground nuts. Add the flour mixture beating just until incorporated. Divide the dough in half and shape into two rectangles about 1/2 inch (1.5 cm) thick. Wrap the two rectangles of dough in plastic wrap and refrigerate until firm (at least one hour and up to several days).
To Edmund earl of Gloucester; seek him out
Alice is almost seven, Henry is almost two, Matt has been married to me for almost ten years, and I am almost entirely sick of writing blog posts. Almost. My household is a mad rush of diapers, snowpants, toy trains, puppets, laundry, dishes, and bad reality tv. Lather, rinse, repeat. But things are good. I grew tired of this blog, and decided a few months ago that I wanted to do a book-only blog.
I’m having an emotional roller coaster day today. As we sailed towards the Dun Laoghaire port this morning I was nearly overcome (nearly, not completely, ’cause I’m a manly man, but I’m sensitive), as I thought about how many generations at least half my family had lived here, and that if my great grandparents hadn’t been brave enough to get on a boat at a port just like that one, I wouldn’t exist. I was overcome with excitement as I had the opportunity to be a huge tourist, and take tours of both the Jameson & Guinness factories, then partake in some of the homeland’s finest libations.
I'm from the planet Xanadu.
Since March 2011, reports of arsonists and gunmen amongst Syria’s opposition have been included in reports regarding the unrest in Syria, albeit buried under sensational headlines of the Syrian government’s “brutality.” More recently, Human Rights Watch (HRW) has conceded that indeed the Syrian opposition “Free Syrian Army” is conducting widespread, systematic abuses including the kidnapping, torture, and murder of both security forces and civilians.
their laughter drifting on the wind.
Check'em out! Here's "Girl," followed by "Numbers."
25 In the twelfth year of Joram the son of Ahab king of Israel did Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah begin to reign.
Further services available here.
Collecting millions from Wall Street was hardly the plan Obama and Holder telegraphed upon entering office. In 2009, the new Attorney General said boldly:
-Started batting at toys and grasping toys that you find on your own without us placing them in your hands.
“I let them know there at the courthouse that it was extremely frustrating,” Ralph said. “I lost my whole morning.”
100% Cotton is my favourite choice and i use it 95% of the time. It is a low loft, it drapes beautifully, soft, cuddly, warm and natural. Cotton batting tends to stick to the backing and top fabrics well so it doesn't shift around as much and easy to make your quilt sandwich. It is available in bleached white, great for your white quilts, natural in colouring or grey for your darker quilts. 95% of the time I use this batting in the natural colour. I love it.
I’m really trimming things down here, the convention was well worth the price of admission. Like most things, it’s better if enjoyed with the company of friends and if there are particular events or people you want to go see. Things I didn’t do at the con that I would have liked to do? Get some autographs. Edward James Olmos (Battlestar Galactica, Blade Runner, The West Wing to name a few) was there. I would have loved to score his signature, maybe on my board game copy ofBattlestar Galactica or on my DVDs of the show. Probably not the game, since I haven’t been able to play it as much as I would like and having a signature on it would mean I’d probably not play it all in order to protect it. Same with getting an autograph from George Takei, Summer Glau, Adam Baldwin or Wil Wheaton. Katee Sackhoff was supposed to show, but apparently had a schedule conflict and had to cancel. It’s an understandable thing, they try to show up for fans, but they also have to work for their living. If a film offer comes up, they have to accept even if it means that they have to give up a prior commitment.
When we fall in love ……
I took some absolutely adorable photos of some brand new babies,
For all 7 weeks, we will limit our media consumption to 7 hours per week. The exception will be media that is necessary to keep the ministry work functioning, this also however, will be limited and streamlined to checking email, texts and FB twice a day. We will limit the amount of personal texting to only what is vital for real life communication. This one is going to be hard for us!
12. Fiore Tra I Fiori (00:30)
Beer & Cheese - $40 per person
Jesus returns to the Galaxy’s Greatest Comic for the first time in more than a decade with his art on this Tale, 'Birth of Mazzikim', which appears in 2000 AD prog 1737 – available now from all good newsagents and comic shops.
I'm currently reading Remains of the Dead by Iain McKinnon, which ties in with Domain. At the start of Domain, a small group of survivors are found by a helicopter crew from the research ship. However, the helicopter only has a limited passenger capacity, so some of the group are whisked away and Domain tells their story. Remains concentrates on the group left behind.
I would conclude that the Holy Bible is not a mere fairy tale book as claimed by non-believers but really God’s work. Its placement of time when the events happened could be verified. Any holes could have been pinpointed if found wrong or misaligned.
Men want more than one thing.
My suggested Phase II
Family Fun magazine supplied me with some delicious recipes for the day.
*Gasps all around.*
What am I to do? I mean the wedding is tomorrow morning at 3 a.m. my time.
However, while I think that people should be discouraged from taking a child to a religious service, I do not think that this should be enforced by law. If there is ever a referendum I would vote against a law that criminalised taking a child to church, as I think that other parents’ rights to live their own lives and raise their own children without interference outweighs my beliefs about the right of a child to an open-minded upbringing.
April watched the sheets dancing in the warm Spring breezes and smiled as she realised what pleasure such a mundane task as washing became on a day like this. In a moment she would step outside, most likely barefoot so she could feel the fresh grass under her feet and gather in the laundry that smelt like the breezes which had dried it. In a moment she would think about making love with her husband under those fragrant sheets. In a moment her whole life would be turning upside down.
"Boredom is a vital problem for the moralist, since at least half the sins of mankind are caused by the fear of it."
We rushed home this evening from the San Juan County Fair so we can harvest vegetables tomorrow for market. I've been having a great time there. Joel and I entered a bunch of flowers and vegetables and weavings.
Not only did we have the news of Roger Joining us on the day, but we also had the news of a much younger Conservative activist making the sensible decision to join UKIP in the attractive shape of Alexandra Swann, who until last October was Deputy Chairman (Political) for Conservative Future. Both made excellent speeches and both were warmly welcomed by the UKIP members.
watch the demons flee.
Mrs. Carey gasped. He said the words so savagely that it gave her quite a start. She had nothing to say. She sat down in her husband’s chair; and as she thought of her desire to love the friendless, crippled boy and her eager wish that he should love her–she was a barren woman and, even though it was clearly God’s will that she should be childless, she could scarcely bear to look at little children sometimes, her heart ached so–the tears rose to her eyes and one by one, slowly, rolled down her cheeks. Philip watched her in amazement. She took out her handkerchief, and now she cried without restraint. Suddenly Philip realised that she was crying because of what he had said, and he was sorry. He went up to her silently and kissed her. It was the first kiss he had ever given her
And if you found their poetry
And, of course, this blog, the fact that you’re reading this right now, is part of the journey. I started God, I Love Paris as a way to stay connected to friends and family back home. It was a way to share my daily life and then became a way I filtered feelings and processed information. Incredibly, it lead to new friendships, both with wonderful people here in the city and all of you from Buenos Aires to Milwaukee, Sydney to Rambouillet. With all the chocolate boxes and Ladurée candles and fancy shoes I bring home with me, it is this blog that I am most grateful to have, for both the memories and connections.
Video dead ahead.
Trumane Johnson was another good bit of business by new head coach Jeff Fisher as the Rams recovered from a shaky start, where they had hoped to draft Justin Blackmon before the Jaguars traded up to get him.
About halfway across he felt something with is foot. It was a small heap about the size of a kitchen sink, and he walked around it as he tapped. On one side he felt something extend from the heap, several extensions. The heap was soft but firm. It slightly squished down, but not much before it was solid again. He didn’t want to touch it, but he realized he would have to. It was furry and had legs too. He felt a rope-like part and guessed it was a tail, which meant two things: at the other end was a head, and it was dead. He thought about diseases on decomposing animals and decided against feeling for the head with his hands. He could tell enough by tapping with his feet that it was a small dog or fox or raccoon, something about that size. He was curious about why it didn’t smell.
belief in the existence an imaginary Bolshevik-Masonic complot until his
Given that latter reality, I am left wondering why RBS needs to reward successful, um, investment bankers. Easing them out by giving them nothing would seem like a more commercial approach, but then what do I know?
We miss you dear one and hope that you and Rudy are together and enjoying some new, grand adventures. Keep an eye on us as we are the ones with broken hearts.
The namesake of the dinner - Brauerei Schloss Eggenburg's Samichlaus Bier. The strongest lager in the world at 14% ABV, this doppelbock is brewed only one day of the year (St. Nicholas' Day - Dec. 6th) and cold-stored for a year before being released. Given the time difference between us & Belgium, there was a decent chance the 2010 batch was being prepared concurrently with our enjoyment of the 2009 vintage.
Power Coaching
I agree with Sharon. Birders, especially those with a ton of experience, can be a little intimidating to talk to. Gulls, flycatchers, warblers, shorebirds, and many, many other groups can be very hard to identify properly, and no one wants to say “Hey, look at that Tennessee Warbler!” when you’re not entirely sure if it’s a Tennessee, a Nashville, an Orange-crowned, or even just a female Wilson’s Warbler. That goes doubly so when you’ve got incredibly experienced birders around who, one might expect, would be quick to chastise you for making an incorrect ID. What I’ve learned though, is that EVERYONE misidentifies birds. Even the most experienced and revered birders in the Calgary community have made mistakes, and will continue to make mistakes in the future. It’s really one of the only ways to get better!
A: I have no idea. (It should be obvious by now that I don't speak to process well. Sorry. What I find so appealing in Wharton is how she gets at the ways tribes use whatever's at their disposal to eradicate any person or thing they perceive as a threat to the tribe's primacy. That's a pretty noir concept, because in noir the individual who goes against the machine is usually destroyed. Think Harry Fabian in NIGHT AND THE CITY or Eddie Coyle in THE FRIENDS OF EDDIE COYLE. What's hopeful in noir and in Edith Wharton novels is that the hero tries to break from the pack. That alone is a life-affirming concept.
Back in 2004, when I started this thing called Doc in the Box, there were only a few Navy bloggers, Scott of Lt. Smash, Cdr Salamander, Chapomatic and Kevin of Primary Main Objective. Lex was the guy who had lived all of the Top Gun stories, he was the aviator’s aviator and even better, told those stories on his blog Neptunus Lex. Later, when I finally met him in person and found out that he was a Navy Captain and probably the most senior military blogger (side not to civilians, a Navy Captain is an O-6, squadrons are commanded by O-5’s mostly and on any given large base, there might be 3 to 6 Captains. One in charge of the base, one for each carrier air group, maybe one at a hospital. I’m currently attached to the largest squadron in the Navy and my CO is a Commander or an O-5, pretty big deal) and he was at my house for a blogger get together and I was definitely the kid at the adult table. Unlike most of us cyber nerds, he was bigger than that large online persona that he assumed. Over the years, I had met up with him at milblog conferences, dinners and once at a change of command which I didn’t recognize him at first in a suit. Without fail, he always had a crowd of people around him and he was telling a story. That guy burned with inner charisma and people hushed to hear what he had to say. I admit, I had a bit of hero worship.
- You have to trust that they will want and be able to learn.
She pressed up against the window, staring out onto a shadowy land beyond the walls of the city, where a small train took her lover, her love away. Alone now. That was all she could feel. Broken, spurned, empty, a massive hole deep inside her where - she didn't want to admit, she hid it as best she could, she was good at lying, even though she was dying inside, she could no longer hide it even from herself - where love had been.
I eventually found a pantheon inside that moist travail
'cuz the teacher's a jerk, he must think I'm a fool
google9ee2f90060a96fc5.html
Ooh, and James McAvoy. He’s decent!
Spacial Delivery is a light-hearted romp of a science fiction novel - the equivalent of a beach read, with more brains, imagination and exotic settings. Though it's not a landmark read, it's a well-written and engaging one: that is, it's worth checking out from the library, or purchasing for a few bucks.
Food processor or large box grater
The easy and foolproof way to do all this is to cheat. Either buy some new sounds or download them from the Net, You can find a lot of user libraries online if you want extra presets for you weapon of chice.
First it was off to Birmingham for the British Craft Trade Show. We always get in a day early to teach Ranger Education classes to retailers.
I started out with the shorter piece of plywood, and painted it white..
And I bet from the title you're wondering how noodles could be raw? Well, here's my secret: I made them out of radishes! Daikon to be exact. So filling and fresh without the pasta bloat, you'll be jumping for joy instead of wanting to take a nap.
I’m investigating that now. Previously I’ve implemented MSSQL’s Full Text Search and iSys Search. As well as Zend’s Lucene in PHP.
Anyways, throughout the day, I just slept, ate, and played some games. I didn’t go out since I was tired from yesterday. It was funny, actually. I was up for an hour or so, played a few games, and then went straight back to sleep. It was around 7 or 8 in the evening, and I still wanted to go to sleep.
Don't judge me, people. I'm just trying to appease the hostiles.
or by withholding valuable knowledge or information about the world. (deception)
I was looking for a little adventure the day I ditched my tour group. But finding a comatose town, with a hot-looking chick asleep in it, was so not what I had in mind.
Van Damme seemed to have a lot of fun in these dual roles, and honestly didn't do a terrible job. I mean, he was never going to win any awards for his performances here, but I enjoyed the differences he brought out between the two brothers. Chad is a bit of a ladies man, and dresses very preppy (late 1980s style). They have a sense of humor about his clothing, as several characters make comments about the way he is dressed. Chad revels in his martial arts abilities and seems confident enough to wear leg warmers and spandex because he's gonna get ass regardless. I only wish they had him stay kind of cocky this way throughout the film. At times later on, he seems goofy, clumsy, nerdy, but I suppose the purpose here was to show the pampered Chad feeling very out of his element.
Moonstruck marker
Well, the clouds in question are to the north-north-east. Usually the sunset is on the other side of the house.
Collaboration to achieve synergies and economies of scale is quite normal and feasible to any business organisation, either with or without cross- shareholding in the two or more companies.
Demo.
That was after we'd gone to Dangar's Falls, where, I discovered only long after the event, Tracey was a life-time sufferer of vertigo.
It’s disheartening to any up-and-coming playwright to see how much of the legitimate American theatre operates on a “pay-to-play” model. But there are bright spots to report. The Dramatists Guild of America has recently enacted a policy that it will not publicize any production opportunities or playwriting contests that require submission fees. Many playwriting newsletters (such as The Loop for Playwrights) have adopted similar policies. And I’m pleased to report that despite the fact I don’t submit plays to any producing organizations that require submission fees (even the prestigious ones, like the O’Neill), I still manage to get my work produced--a lot (for example, I recently had several plays produced by the nonprofit Love Creek Productions in NYC, a theatre where I knew no one prior to submitting, have never paid a submission fee, and have never been asked to donate or help fundraise a dime). I also no longer support playwrights’ organizations like Chicago Dramatists that have gone heavily over to the “pay-to-play” model, and that hasn’t hurt my playwriting career, either (though I’m sure they’d rather I didn’t say that in public).
(Footnote)
Thank you for viewing my project today. I look forward to seeing your next project.
Well, finally, here is my card Above, for this week, hopefully, I think I have covered all the base's.
The past year especially has been a time that God has brought a slew of new friends and contacts into our life and it’s almost like He knows what He is doing. I find it ironic that I didn’t realize that it was Ash Wednesday until the restlessness inside of us got so intense that we made the decision this morning that today was the day we were going to make some drastic changes and start to simplify. Now, don’t judge us because what is drastic to us might be commonplace to you…nevertheless, we know we are about to get our butt kicked with an early spiritual, emotional and physical spring-cleaning of sorts. God needed us in this place and has worked on us for over two years using authors, friends, family, pastors and leadership.
He came to York again this year and ... well, let's just say I wasn't going to let the opportunity pass to ensure Sean's book got the attention I was convinced he deserves.
Entertainment and shopping
My thoughts are so fragmented, but I am blogging dang it! ;-)
The soldier picked it up, smiled and said, "That's it."
1. Never go to bed without saying “I love you” to your spouse.
So with this In mind, I will create the perfect poker room where I can love the game even more. I’m selfish I know but in the end I might do it for you to? Cause what I will love at least a thousands other persons will do to.
Baby B: 3 lbs 14 oz
I hope to get caught up on the family blog soon, but I have started another blog with recipes www.rolyndiasmenu.blogspot.com. I love recipes and trying new things so the recipe blog is right up my alley. Hopefully I can post recipes on a regular basis and if you have any you would like to share feel free to send and I will post once I try them out.
make friends, trying to get the attention of the girl he likes, and adjusting to life after losing his mother to brain cancer. The author’s cartoon illustrations help to tell the story and also keep it funny, even though the overall theme of dealing with grief is sad. The first person point of view made it easy for me to connect with the character of Milo and I quickly got wrapped up in his problems. Even though the main character is a boy, I think girls would enjoy this book too. As a writer, I’d study this novel to see how to weave in specific details that help to create the perspective of a middle grade reader (e.g. “her smile is like a curly French fry”, “hoping the conversation can
When I get warmed up and set a timer, I can shut out pretty much everything else. It’s really fun to just sit there and commune with the characters while they’re doing weird things.
Patent licence
The King of Kong
Now boil 4-5 glass jars and their lids in a pan filled with water for about 10 minutes.
Over 80 designers, FIVE shopping sprees each day. No one knows where the prizes will be! Each day of the hop JustRite will have five Mystery Blog Candy Prizes hidden along the hop with a total retail value of $600. JustRite will randomly select five mystery blogs each day of the hop and randomly allocate each of the shopping sprees. For your chance to win, simply leave a little love (a comment) on each designer’s blog including the JustRite blog. The more designers you leave comments with, the better your chances of winning. Each day’s comments will remain open for three days. A winner from each of the mystery blogs’ comments will be randomly chosen using Random.org. Consult the listing of designers at the JustRite blog each day (each day’s designers will be different) and start out on your way! Beginning Friday, March 26, summaries of all the winners will be posted on the JustRite blog. Good luck to everyone and enjoy all the JustRite eye candy along the hop!
Serve this with fries, smashed taters, salad, whatever you like.
but the stamp is part of the Holly Hill range. I just so happened to have put this stamp,
There must be a more realistic way to practice “Paying Attention.” Perhaps, to focus more on what you’re feeling and if you make a judgement fine, but not to dwell on the judgement.
Later, Mary and Marshall share a moment on the roof. And it’s quite possibly the best happy moment of this episode. Marshall reiterates that Mary’s dad was able to protect her, even in that one moment.
reach levels of addiction here.
I've never yelled with joy at risk and speed!
It's still gorgeous summer weather out here right now so I'm thinking there will be a few more lunches and dinners like this one. If you can stand turning your oven on for the time it takes to bake the eggplant, I think this is something that would go well with all sorts of things. You could maybe make it early in the morning when it's not so hot yet if the heat is an issue. Eggplant Bacon is super easy to make. You just slice up some eggplant, mix together the marinade, dip the eggplant in the marinade and bake it. Easy peasy. Even better - even some of our omnivore friends loved it.
Please email resume for consideration.
sleepy stroller ride
Some of the things that I loved about this book:
We will just have to wait and see how well the competitors’ design and technology stacks up, but what’s certain is Pandora’s dominance in personalized radio is about to become a heated battle.
I am not really one for New Year's Resolutions, but I do have some goals for 2010:
I can't tell you. It's a secret ^^
- Nope. No jubes neigh wuh that wee smick strokin' mah beag.
Her stove, and lays out food in tins.
carved they are
Be sure to stop by tomorrow for our Valentine card to you!
★ 12月25日 Meet the whole chaos group in Shinjuku & go to Jishuban Club (13:00)
Contestant : Naomi Campbell
Don't be jealous, but we just got an Indoor Pool. It was a quick and easy installation; we put it right between the Sculpture Garden and our Personal Gym. We hardly even noticed it was there until construction was complete and it was ready for us to wade right in.*
» 9/15 – Toronto, ON @ Air Canada Centre
The ANC was completely unskilled and inexperienced in any form of management, let alone government. Yet everyone cheered them, because they seemed so nice, so likeable. Their bragging, "sophisticated" appearance and their pretentious quasi-intelligence bluffed the ignorant masses into believing they are capable and in control.
We'll be chatting with the hashtag #BECOME so join us for your chance to mix and mingle and win!
at the front of the room.
We are now heading for elections, which will be held on September 12th. Our electoral campaign will focus on the need to restore our national sovereignty, because without our sovereignty we cannot defend our identity and fight against Islamization.
In a world that is cynical, it is time to come back and focus on the beauty of Jesus Christ. Jesus has all the attributes of God and sentiments of Man combined. Jesus has a firmness that is not overbearing and a kindness that is not weak. Jesus is altogether lovely in every way which you turn Him.
BUT, be ready to be deeply, deeply offended if you look to psychiatry to "save" your children. If you do, remember...it ain't about you. Allow me to re-iterate...IT AIN'T ABOUT YOU...don't make me have to slap some sense into you.
The Concord grape offers not only natural antioxidants, but also a mix of plant nutrients (polyphenols), which could benefit heart health. Including heart healthy food in our kids’ diets is not only essential to their growth and development, but I’m told it could also shift the trend of nearly half of all Americans who still don’t eat the recommended daily amount of fruits and vegetables.
Here are the facts: a student transferred to SUNY Geneseo from Genesee Community College. According to public records, he had sex with a 14-year-old girl when he was 19. This landed him a level three (high risk) sex offender designation. To comply with Megan’s Law, University Police were legally obligated to tell students about the his enrollment, so they decided to post it on the college’s FB page, which has about 9,000 followers. In an interview with YNN Rochester, University Police chief Sal Simonetti said they thought social media would be the most effective way to get the message out there.
p.s. thanks for being my diary today.
The placement of the preposition of ‘But’ creates directness, a blunt atmosphere for the scene, and it also becomes an effective way to finish the scene within a determined statement of intent, thus informing the reader of what is yet to come.
Lee's grandmother recently had surgery so I made her a get-well card. I pulled out a real oldie, Roses in Winter, and then paired it with a new stamp set for the sentiment, Perfectly Penned. I love that font : )
Dawg Daze is broken in to age divisions for 10-under, 12-under, 14-under, 16-under and 18-under teams. Each team plays three pool games, which determines seeding for a single elimination bracket-style tournament. The elimination rounds start today at 5 p.m.
- Be easy on yourself. Forgive your relapses into obsessiveness or panic. Be patient with the mind’s healing process and its ups and downs. Don’t believe in your worst moods; take the attitude that they are steps of normalization, not personal weakness or failure.
- Dates of commencement and termination of work and the nature of the work,
AF or MF – AF
Molly became a big sister not once, but twice. Two more pregnancies, two more births.
Two out of three of those anti-Steve comments were anonymous. Only one person had the cherries to publicly refute what I was writing about. Justin in Colorado, I respect your different viewpoint and wish you well.
I love shooting the moon!
The Demon Hunter is a personal favorite of mine. Simply put, she’s just an all around badass. From dual wielding, to traps, to crazy evasive acrobatics, she has an arsenal of destruction at her disposal. Now I don’t know if it’s just a “girl” thing, but when I play RPGs I typically stick to playing archer/ranged characters. Whenever I see a ranged character, I am immediately inclined to choose that role. Some may consider them to be a bit “squishy”, which I would agree in some cases, but this is just my preference of course. In the Diablo III beta however, I didn’t think my character was weak at all! As I have said, she is a badass! I was mowing monsters down left and right, setting up traps, slowing them and then completely unloading on them. I could hardly be touched! Now I will say that if you find yourself playing this character, which I suggest you try your hand at them all, a heads up with her evasive back flips, as they can get you into a precarious situation if you do not pay attention to where you are going which is very easy to do when you are being surrounded by the enemy.
The Press Democrat reports, "They were greeted and fed, over-the-top generously, by Fieri, the Midas-touch superstar who was a flicker in the galaxy of Sonoma County restaurateurs until he followed a whim to enter the Next Food Network Star competition in 2005." The three culinary travelers were served garlic onion tortilla soup, Johnny Garlic's Caesar salad, coconut shrimp, Ahi Won Tacos and cajun chicken fettuccine.
8) More generally, is full employment consistent with low-inflation in the United States or elsewhere?
Most of all, have FUN! And have an awesome sales season!!
This is me just after finishing with a medal and a well earned hot chocolate:
Don't see this movie. It sucked...SLOWLY!
A grotty, grizzly day greets me as I draw back the curtains. I groan inwardly, grabbing my gear to get ready for my run. My tired old legs try to pretend they don't understand the instructions I am giving but by the time I reach the Granville Road corner they are resigned to another gruelling task. On and on they trudge, with gritty determination, only coming to grinding halt when they have finally completed the circuit. Great going legs!
This is of course her. We chatted like old friends swapping concepts and understandings of life, God and metaphysics. She is 83 and spoke softly and openly about her whole life.
I just ran across a blog with a very unique linky party idea. And while I love it when blogger take an idea and make it their own it is great to see an original idea. Or what is at least one I have not seen before.
Place 1 jalapeno in the bottom of each scoop. Fill each scoop about 3/4 of the way up with the cheese/yogurt mixture.
people ignored to jettison their crap –
I wish I could kiss
I spread the muck over the garlic as a mulch. He "dug up weeds" with his big metal spoon.
Dear Aidan
This cake may not look like much from my photo but the name says it all...lemon bliss!
b) How much baby vomit is normal?
Since Cinco de Mayo is just a few short days away, I wanted to share with you some of my favorite celebration ideas. I hope you enjoy these creative ideas as much as I do!
Kong Rithdee writes about movies and popular culture for the Bangkok Post.
City of Christmas Ghosts – Goldblade featuring Poly Styrene
The AJDS recognises the vacuum that exists in the Jewish community for young people concerned about social justice and environmental sustainability. With your help we aspire to fill it. To that end, we’ve recently employed a young community organiser, who will be able to provide support for implementing the ideas and plans that we develop over the day.
“The last two decades have seen a "… cumulative disinvestment in publicly funded programmes resulting from the withdrawal of the health departments of provincial governments from this sector, the absence of discounts for research tests from the business model for the National Health Laboratory Service, chronic underfunding of the Medical Research Council ... and the lack of funding streams to universities that might in principle have been applied to meet the overall shortfall in support.
Chroma subsampling: 4:2:0
I've also admired Jo Ann's work for years and was thrilled when Kris Graves announced that he would exhibit her work in November. I asked Jo Ann if she would be up for a quick interview. I was very happy when she agreed. This post comes late in the show's run. It closes on Saturday, December 18. If you're in New York and haven't yet seen it you have a few days.
I have taken a few shots, but I am new to this and its taking a while to used to the setup, I thought birds could be difficult this is a whole new ball game.
Jack chose not to eat the nuggets; instead, he wolfed down a poppadum (a large chip typically served as an appetizer with mango chutney) and several portions of garlic naan bread. In the past, he's also eaten the curry sauce, but last night preferred to stick with the side dishes.
How can there be any “dignity of the office” of a liar? Whether it is George Bush or Barack Obama, there is no dignity in dishonesty, corruption, greed, narcissism, or even the wars we pursue.
As you may know, I started a new job at the beginning of March. It involves a long commute when I am “in the office” and then there is also quite a bit of traveling, overnight traveling around the state. Last week I was in Portland M-Th and then Friday I was briefly in the office for two hours where I gathered all the material I would need for this coming week’s training.
Imperi-Ale 5.0 was launched last week and Kevin’s customers are loving it. There’s still a few kegs left, but you should probably beat a hasty path down to Backstreet Brewery in Vista if you want to taste this break out, all Oregon grown hops beer. Hey, to those of you who might’ve stereotyped IH as an aroma only outfit, we can go big with the alpha, too!
One of the best things about having your friends know that you "do furniture" is that they always call you before they dump off their trash to the DI or Goodwill. My sweet neighbor gave me two little nightstands a while back and I finally did something with them this week.
Now if anybody had seen me at half past five sat in the chair, head nodding – you know the way I mean – when your chin banging on your chest wakes you up, they would have never have believed that less than an hour later I would be out running. But then that’s the plus side of having someone to run with, that extra bit of motivation to get you out of the door. Thanks Gill!
* I have officially completed two weeks of the Fat Flush diet and have lost a total of eight pounds so far. Last week was rough with four late nights at work, I wasn’t able to fit the gym into my schedule. I am feeling good doing this diet. Turned down red velvet cake, whoopie pie cake, and a cupcake. That’s right. Go me. The diet is restricting and makes it hard to eat on the run, but I am sticking with it. Discipline baby. I will get back into a size 10. I will get back into a size 10.
Her mother snapped as she spanked Lyndsee's hand away from the cookie dough. The seven-year-old fair-headed child sprung back, rubbing the loose skin on her hand. Her face shriveled up like silly putty into a pout. Her lower lip swelled pink and juicy while her brow furrowed like a melting candle.
Thanks for the great run. It will always be a special time to me.
Another day, I was on the phone, trying to write down what PhoneMan was delivering to me when suddenly, a tourist walked into the store. My phone began to slip from my face. He was a deluxe tourist. His hair was inky black and pulled back in a greasy ponytail with a rubber band. His beard was long and white like Santa Clause, which matched his physique perfectly. He had many pens stuffed in his man-breast pocket, which left little pools of ink on his pit-stained polo-shirt. The most magnificent thing about him was his fanny pack that had not one, but TWO cup holders. He was waving a rusty bayonet haphazardly through the air while smiling like he had just brought me something I was really going to enjoy. I ignored him and asked PhoneMan to repeat his question.
There are choices, every day, that we make, determining how we handle these things.
Mythology and spiritual belief predict Mankind has enough presence of mind to make a quantum leap in consciousness, to save itself. History says it’s never too late to start anew. Native American and Maya traditions say now is a good time.
Your sister?
‘Don’t do this, this is crazy, you know me!’
My heart and soul like to visit Shutter Sisters 365 blog. I am attracted to photography as storytelling, and this group of women is walking amongst us with their camera straps around their necks, documenting every single day of this life.
On Sept. 28, 1896, the day after the elephant burnt down, the Brooklyn Eagle published a eulogy of sorts for the prominent pachyderm, “Loss of an Old Friend.” The writer, using delicate language, suggested the elephant did not always attract the most esteemed clientele.
The Case of the Overprotective Ass: Stars of the silver screen Alasdair Hamilton and Toby Bowe are wowing the post WWII audiences with their depictions of Holmes and Watson. When they are asked by a friend to investigate a mysterious disappearance, they jump at the chance—surely detection can’t be that hard? But a series of threatening letters—and an unwanted suitor—make real life very different from the movies.
Bob asked me about my inspiration for the lyrics ”You’ve got the PEACHES, I’ve got the cream”. I told him about my mother who was from the Peach state, Georgia. (The above is my parent’s car on their wedding day in Texas on December 1955.)
See above. I interpret “bleeding” here to mean suffering–and while not all suffering is beautiful–I do find that all true beauty contains and is grounded in suffering and sacrifice. I do not posit this as an external objective truth for everyone–but merely as a subjective observation that I believe in.
For the day the SPX/DOW were -0.50%, and the NDX/NAZ were -0.30%. Bonds gained 6 ticks, Crude dropped $1.55, Gold slid $10.00, and the USD was flat. Support for the SPX slips to the 1372 and 1363 pivots, with resistance at the 1386 and 1440 pivots. Short term momentum dipped below neutral today after getting quite overbought yesterday. Tomorrow weekly Jobless claims at 8:30. Then Existing home sales, the Philly FED and Leading indicators at 10:00.
A public scientologist and especially an OT is demanded to get his or her “stats up”. OTs are run on statistics. Their production is measured. Their value is measured by how many books they sell to “raw public”, how many people they disseminate Scientology to, how much PR they generate for Scientology and above all how much money they can fund-raise for a new building. The focus is on these immediate statistics.
I don't know what they do on those nights we don't play, but nothing I've heard indicates nights of debauchery and skirt chasing. Instead, I hear about business deals and upcoming tournaments and occasionally the hurt comes out, "After 18 years, man...I don't know...I don't know if she was cheating, but she got so damn caught up on the FaceBook, that she never had time for me any more."
This figurative truth becomes clearly evident in watching the tides of mankind and the manner in which we hope for these tides or trends to fill the hole. There is always purpose to man’s comings and his goings; the ebb and the flow. We are always striving to improve our lot in life; to fill the void, avoid the ebb, and normalize the flow – increase our vocabulary, trade up the car, start a revolution, make a better impression, identify the inner-child, have whiter teeth, more colorful hair, better wages, more vacation, etc., ad infinitum. Our drive, or purpose, is certainly to fill an unseen hole; to make things better. The metanarrative of our life may even be, quite simply, that we try to fill the hole. It’s what we do. It’s the condition that we’re born with.
Eno/Wobble
3/4 cup coffee
I just finished this cloche. It is sitting on our family room coffee table.
Blackalicous
I’ve used overcompensatory before, but it really is the word that best describes Jormungand thus far; it knows that Koko is its greatest asset, and though she is quite an asset, nothing else the show introduces can begin to match her level of infectious kookiness. Yes, a pair of crazed assassins known as Orchestra is shown to have a vendetta against her because she’s an arms dealer, but they’re two of the most insignificant characters introduced thus far, and that’s saying something when there are only two characters that get any sort of development. All they do is run around with a neon sign saying “HEY AREN’T WE CRAZY? WE COMPARE SHOOTING PEOPLE TO MAKING MUSIC. CRAZY RIGHT? FUCKING CRAZY, AHHHHHH!” in big bold font hovering right above them, shoot people, and swear gratuitously. It was refreshing for a few episodes that Jormungand was willing to eschew minor development in order to jump right into the action, but doing it for three episodes straight is treading over a thin line.
I am at a point in my life where I feel like I am having a mid life crisis and I am not even in my forties! I am in my twenties! But I feel like a trapped bird- one whose wings have been clipped and it is taking me some time to fly away. Life has me trapped in a sad reality where I just can no longer feel anything but sadness and conflict. Conflicting thoughts as to how I should live my life, how to carry on, how to survive in this world, how to find love and experience it. There is so much a person needs to know when going out exploring, when going out experiencing the world and they say that adversities challenge you and develop you as a person but for the past few days I have been questioning things.
Upper Arm: Left - 13.25...12.5"...12.5"...13" Right - 14"...13"...13"...13.25"
The idea was based on a Compassionate Cooks podcast where Colleen first described open heart surgery and then compared that with the alternative by reading a recipe for split pea soup.
On a more positive note. We have finally received some nice Spring weather. What a treat. I am excited to get out of my house and start working on the yard. Tonight is the Father/Son campout...the one redeeming thing in May. Seth has been so excited. He calls it Father/Son camp. The only slight drawback is that they are going to the sand dunes to camp which means...lots of sand for me to clean up. Oh well, it's worth the night of quiet. Too bad I'm so worn out my usual, late night project/movie night will likely be an early to bed night.
Now, there are many things I could be accused of. Being slightly animal crackers is definitely one of them. However, I am not blind to my animal's faults. So as much as I adore our puppy, I know full well that he is a wolf in Spaniel's clothing, and given half a chance would scoff my chickens for a laugh. So you can imagine my horror when the little demon worked out how to open the back door when the girls were free ranging yesterday.
Anyway, the puking has definitely gotten better yay! I'm tired but I can manage even on days where I don't get a nap. I can feel the babies move on occasion but not regularly.
No arguments or apologies. I felt light. For the first time I felt like I could move on. I had washed my hands of him. Immediately the phone rang off the hook. He knew that he was losing me. He would apologize, charm, and promise until I gave in. But the track would keep going around and my body and heart were tired of running.
who we want to be
Include a Sentiment
In the nine years that followed the Hijrah to Madinah (where permission was given to fight) the Prophet (Sallallahu Alaihi Wasallam) personally led 28 military campaigns, and during the same period the Companions (ra) embarked on another 51 military campaigns.
This is therefore only a beginning contract, if you will. It’s what you select to arrive. You selected your parents, your race, your country, and even your biological attributes and predispositions. Your past karma is all part if it, and what you call your “past life experience” is also there. It’s complex, but you often feel it at the cellular level. It’s what makes Humans drive toward a passion to be artists, musicians, mothers and fathers, or even criminals. It’s a powerful force.
And here it is in its new home...
11.Red City Radio-They Don't Make Gravel Roads Like They Used To
When I was 7 years old, my dad took our family on a big camping trip. When we arrived, I helped my Dad pick the perfect place for our campsite. We put up our family tent, built our fire pit, and started to cook dinner. Darkness came fast and we bedded down for the night. Everything seemed to be going great, until around 2 a.m. when a Texas-size rainstorm moved in and it started to pour. Before very long, we soon realized that our perfect campsite was positioned on a slope; and, all of the rainwater was flooding into our tent. We were drenched! Everything we owned was soaked, sleeping bags and all. Unfortunately, our trip was ruined, so we packed up and drove home in the middle of the night. I was so disappointed, and all I wanted to know was…why didn’t someone post a “No Camping” sign at this campsite? It would have totally changed the outcome of our trip!
returning on the day you left. Once mature,
Also inspired by my breakfasts these morns ... anything buttery right from cookies or scones or toast spread with layers of cream cheese ,butter and my chunky strawberry preserve which am so oooo in love with .........
8:03: I confiscate the baby lotion from Junebug, who was trying to paint a picture on the carpet with it. I send everyone down to the schoolroom with the instructions of clearing the table so we can do school.
The hardware is truly impressive
‘You gave an old woman a little moment of joy,’ she said. ‘Thank you.’
I find that it's easier to get a good looking mat when your doing a torn edge if you adhere the top layer down before you tear the top edge so you know how far to tear down without having to guess.
After a moment’s consideration, I set spiders to stringing webs around the balconies as well. When capes were in the cards, I couldn’t afford to ignore the possibility of grappling hooks, rappelling, teleportation or flight. The spiders would sense any movement of the webs, and I could sense what the spiders did, in turn.
The mask sheet, itself, is quite large and felt really thick and course. Additionally, it still had the eye-hole bits still intact with the mask and it was difficult to rip off so I just left them on them and folded them down do they didn't cover my eyes (HAHAHA!)
We received the two new summer lines from Fancy Pants. You will be seeing lots of new creations with these lines soon because we are using them for our April Design Team. Fancy Pants also has a new newsletter with great ideas. I have the line below for you.
2) Now add the sugar, yogurt, water, oil, vanilla extract and stir till it is well combined.
Of course the Métis resisted those thieves! I suspect if Indigenous North Americans ever turned up on a european (or any foreign) shore with murder, bio-terrorism (smallpox blankets), rape, pillage, looting, kidnapping, child sex slavery, and adult work slavery, and theft the only thing on their mind, europeans (or anyone else) would resist as well! The fact is Indigenous North Americans were happy where they were, and had no desire to invade and disturb other people around the globe for "riches" and illusory "power over".
They existed for a time on the planet Segonax where they took over the Psychic Circus and its entertainers, the Ringmaster and the Chief Clown. Outside their own world, they appeared as a man, a woman and a little girl sitting in the audience, while in another world they appeared as trio of living stone statues. They used the Circus to recruit new performers to perform and to die as punishment for failing to amuse.
His house was jammed with collections of all descriptions, mainly household hardware and haberdashery. And data…weather data. Millions of pieces of plain paper, with sunrise and sunset, minimum and maximum temperature and rainfall documented for every day of the previous 60 years. All in tiny writing, never a day missed.
You will find in the story of Luka's quest reminders of the thousand and one nights and of video games. Rushdie has immense fun with puns and wordplay, and you will, too! Here in this world we find the old gods, from Greece and Sumer and Egypt and all the world, flying carpets and Fire Bugs. Nothing is what it seems, allegiances shift, and Luka and his companions must ever be on the alert, gathering and losing and regaining lives as they move on from level to level. Luka's love for his father causes him to defy Time, to risk his own life, and to conquer his fears.
Well, as the saying goes, better late than NEVER! Ugh. I won't even go into the problems I am having with Blogger. I really feel terrible about letting the team down. Soooo sorry ladies! But it is still Wednesday here in Oregon. So I kinda made the deadline... Sorta.
and then to me I thought I would keep in theme.
Taking steps to clear my mind
I haven't decided what to do about the counters. They aren't granite, and I do love putting hot pans and sticky spoons on granite. So marble won't work here. Even if it's sealed, I am too dangerous.
When he feel he close to his climax, Yoochun pump Junsu’s junior fast make the smaller squirm underneath him. With some trust and pump more, they both cum almost in same time. Yoochun spilled his seed inside Junsu and Junsu in their chest.
We will be fined immediately if we do not implement this treaty and that is blackmail in any man’s language, it is time the Irish People stood up and said enough is enough to Europe and in particular the Germans, it is easy to foist austerity and penalties on someone else when you will be unaffected by the rule which enforces the penalties and austerity.
Vodicka P, Tvrdik T, Osterman-Golkar S, Vodicková L, Peterková K, Soucek P, Sarmanová J, Farmer FB, Granath F, Lambert B, Hemminki K. An evaluation of styrene genotoxicity using several biomarkers in a 3-year follow-up study of hand-lamination workers. Mutat Res 1999; 445: 205-224.
Last night April and I were coming to terms with the loss of our 18 month old cat, Jess. He had been missing since lunchtime the day before (Sunday) and while we know that isn’t a terribly long time for a cat, we had a feeling this was the last we had seen of him. We started talking about how we could tell Savannah this. She got Jess as a birthday present the year before and though she hadn’t quite connected with him (or perhaps it was the other way around!), he was a part of her life. She talked about him and prayed for him every night in her prayers.
All this blogging, Facebooking, Twittering, Linkedinning, Diggiting and other more arcane forms of apparently essential author-profile-building - gah, it's amazing we have time to write at all any more! Of course, if you do none of this you are either a) feeling guilty / inadequate b) that and paranoid that every other author must be becoming better known, better connected and therefore obviously more successful than you or c) being rampantly Luddite and proud of your organic writing life and acquired technophobia.
Tammie, thank you for paying attention to my drawings and paintings. Thank you for reading my words. Thank you for your encouragement. Thank you for gifting me prints of your magnificent snowflakes. Thank you for thinking of me when you drew this. Thank you for your words of comfort during my sad times. Thank you for being kind to me when I was mourning the loss of my sister Leah. Just thank you for being you, beautiful, wonderful, artistic and absolutely fabulous. Thank you.
Johannesburg - Furniture worth almost R245 000 has been attached at Police Minister Nathi Mthethwa's Cape Town office to cover the costs of civil claims, the DA claimed on Thursday.
Sarika is number one teen celebrity from bangladesh . If you are looking for her sexy hot and exclusive sexy pics of Bangladeshi celebrity actress and teen model Sarika
The "wasteful virtues," I'm afraid,
*) Permit public (U.S.) schools and public airwaves to be used to convert non-Muslims.
The Boers preferred to live in open spaces large enough that they did not see the smoke of their neighbours.
Zach wanted another turn. He liked my "God bless..." prayer. So he put his own spin on it with "God loves me. God loves Teagan. God loves Mommy. God loves Daddy."
Saul of Tarsus knew to whom he spoke. “I am Jesus whom thou persecutest.” But in our text in Acts 22:8, He said, “I am Jesus of Nazareth, whom thou persecutest.” He singled Himself out as there were, and are many who call themselves Jesus. Saul knew exactly Who it was who addressed him.
Jack’s Book: An Oral Biography of Jack Kerouac
When a self-conscious young woman discovers the boy in drama class is actually the immortal who painted the world into being, she becomes the target of another painter who could shatter not only her new sense of hope, but her world, as well.
Even the slums are beautiful
being treated as a joyous thing, part of life. Someone would pick
Also, there was limited space to store dockets and the office was soon going to run out of room.
Otherwise, I give high marks to the heliopsis, which has been going strong for 2 months and all my lovely colocasia, some of which are finally showing their variegations. This slowness to display variegation is my only complaint.
I have a client whose wife has a college degree and a license to practice real estate sales. However, the husband and wife agreed about 6 years ago, that the wife would stay home and raise the children as a stay at home mother. The husband, my client, was and is the major breadwinner of the family.
My cousin still needs your prayers. Today they found some blood clots and there is discussion going on how to handle them. They have put in a filter to help with these. They are doing testing to see if Maggie will be able to be off the ventilator anytime soon. Please keep praying that this is possible. A bullet shattered her C5. That can have dire consequences. Functionally her brain is working just fine. Praise God for that... but at the same time I can't even begin to grasp the emotional and psychological pain she has and will have for a lifetime.
the address of an uncle, the capital of Paraguay.
The cozy nest of downy sheath.
Christopher Fowler – The Spider Kiss
Going into Debt
Disc 2A (October 2nd 1995) Yoyogi Olympic Pool, Tokyo, Japan
Thank you for making each day of my life beautiful.
I've done a bit of digging online but not found anything relating to this particular problem. However I've been disappointed with comments I've seen around the life of Apple devices. Hence I'm starting to think mine may be on the way out.
Because Kim from Let Me Start By Saying did such a cool dessert post before, I’m am featuring her very fine-looking recipe here. I especially like that it shamelessly utilizes a cake mix in order to allow you to look like June Cleaver without having time to get too hot from standing over the oven. Grab your popsicles and pull up a chair on the deck! I invite you all to make these lip-smacking little numbers and share your thoughts.
Designer: Homespun Elegance
The size of a man’s penis has no bearing on whether or not I would sleep with him. Maybe that is because I have never had sex with anyone I thought had a tragically small penis. I am typically attracted to or turned on by what said penis is attached to and I have never not slept with someone I wanted to see naked just because they didn’t live up to my expectation’s in the size department. If he is larger than most, good for him (and maybe me.)
6. It's possible to pause the campaign if you wish. I stopped the ads for the month of December, when I put my book on sale, because it didn't make sense to spend $0.50 per click when I would make less than that per book.
I tell it like it is and then move on. I do not hold grudges. I am not stubborn. And I am none of the above — not a rebel, not a troublemaker and certainly not a bitch. And I’m far from hateful, I might add. I’m extremely loving and caring — the best friend anyone can have, actually!
It is not just in some of us; it is in everyone.
Orchestra Manager Tanya Phillips, who has been involved with the project since its 1986 inception, said some of the 300-plus players to have been through the orchestra over quarter of a century will attend - or indeed send their parents!
Millions of professionals are following more than two million companies on Linkedin. Why do professionals follow companies? They can be current clients, potential clients, and professionals in the media, job seekers, and other stakeholders that may provide or looking to gain insights. Having a company listing in Linkedin provides these followers with the latest news; understand your companies’ services.
Driskill hired local architect Jasper N. Preston to design his hotel. Preston sat on the jury that selected Elijah E. Myers as architect of the new Capitol, and later served for a time as supervising architect of that project.
Yes, we watch Glee. Who doesn't love a good musical number sung in the middle of a show? I've always enjoyed musicals and singing. Music has been a big part of my life for a long time. Makes sense I would enjoy Glee. Even Mr. man enjoys it. "High Schoolers" singing and dancing every day? Yes, please!
Our tummies were still upset so I had the genius idea of grabbing breakfast at Pizzafari. We weren't going to use a counter service meal for that day so it worked out. Barbara and Ben got the Bounty Platter as did Matt, only he gave away his meat. They all found it really filling and liked the french toast the best. We all agreed that the potatoes were seriously amazing. I got the Spinach and Goat Cheese Frittata and it was okay but a little on the small side and sort of dry. Not bad, but not great. The potatoes had me craving more, though. A cast member noticed Barbara's birthday button and surprised her with a cupcake! I don't care if it was only 10:30 a.m. Cupcakes are welcome anytime.
Find the author online:
Pasta with Sausage and Kale
magnificent L'Hotel Des Invalides - buriel place to Napoleon Bonaparte
(Then) Cardinal Ratzinger would have been primarily charged with evaluating the doctrinal issues regarding Fr. Murphy’s alleged violation of the sacrament of reconciliation … not the abuse allegations.
What this means is that writing costs money in the short term, and until you earn a respectable income from book sales, you’ll need a way to finance your efforts. For most, it means working full time and writing when you can, but it doesn’t have to be that way. By planning ahead and investing wisely, you can build a stable income that will support your writing and help you move away from depending on a paycheck toward becoming a financially-independent writer.
Meanwhile, all this unseasonal warmth has meant that our peach and greengage trees are now in flower and our doyenne de comice pear is budding nicely. The ornamental cherry will follow very shortly, but our young melrose apple and fruiting black cherry have a little while to go yet. We also found another colour break in our cowslips; an orange version. Looking over the valley towards the north Eric's field is now definitely showing the first yellow colza flowers.
Teri jaan ke sadke mein kuchh aaisa kar jaaun
GC: Now to your career, I want to start out by asking you when you first realized you wanted to become an actor.
The man standing before the desk was in Official mode.
The problem is, it's not just the GOPpers. Defense Secretary Leon Panetta said recently it would be "irresponsible" to cut any more than already agreed to, that $487 billion over 10 years.
"What school did you go to?"
Dogville
He was, indeed, a «literary» man, absorbed for the most part in journalism but finding time, also, to publish poetry and to perform his duties as official translator for the National Council. August Schou, director of the Norwegian Nobel Institute, points out that Ducommun’s writing often showed «striking acuity of thought», citing a dialogue he wrote in 1901 in which he refutes the notion current in that day that a war between major powers would be short because of the destructiveness of modern weapons, and predicts, in its stead, a long «war of attrition with alternating advances and retreats, and with operations bound up with a system of trenches and strongpoints»1.
They had a few tables set up outside which was great especially on our nice spring days here in the valley and because the inside was crowded so it allowed there to be enough seating for everyone. I would definitely suggest going early if you are going for lunch, we got there a little before 11:30 and the line was almost out the door. It did move quickly so that says something about the service, the staff was friendly and they were moving through the guests in line seeing if anyone needed help with just pastries or bread to keep the line moving.
Jenkins & Hogin LLP
“Florida Sustainables has licensed a polymer invented by University of Florida graduate student Ryan Martin and associate chemistry professor Stephen Miller…They have devised a way to synthesize polymers called polyesteracetals, providing the strength of petroleum-based plastics lacking in other ‘green’ plastics made from PLAs — or polylactic acid.”
about a minute ago · Comment · Like
In my recent contest, I asked entrants to supply the link to other blogs they couldn't live without. So many fabulous blogs were mentioned, I decided to collect them here in one post for easy reference. I will make a permanent link to this post in my sidebar as well!
- I love how she cranes her neck to look for people or things ... like when she's sitting on the bed and daddy crawls around on the floor to pop up and say "peek-a-boo".
the bar method
Then on the far end of the ripped spectrum you have professional body builders like Lou Ferrigno, the original Incredible Hulk. He is incredibly ripped (likely down in the 2% body fat range) and very muscular. Yet the build and body composition isn’t ideal for athletic performance. When body builders make it on stage for their performance, they are actually at their weakest because they have gone through a period of excessive dehydration and fasting in order to optimize the ripped look. This is not the ideal athletic build if you still want to have a performance-based build.
3.) Add spices to pot, and cook with onion mixture for 30-45 seconds; careful not to burn.
Congrats Jenn!! Email me your address and I will get your stinkin' cute fat quarters out to you this week!
I lay in an NHS hospital bed and cried with the pain and the upset and the anxiety and just the not knowing what the hell was wrong with me.
The Age Management Institute and Nina Cucina will be your partners to optimize your health!’
I've been thinking about this a lot since that conversation with my mother, and the mere idea fills me with such joy, that I think I'd like to do it sooner than in my old age. In fact, much sooner. I don't know when --I think I just have to let life happen and see when it would be a good time to do this.
Saucy Applesauce
"Frankly", the Foreign Minister replied sharply, "I have not had an opportunity to make categories of unhappiness we have to work, to make it impossible for this to happen in the future in Lebanon."
“If today’s reports are to be believed, we would expect the IOC to defend the Olympic Charter and exclude Saudi Arabia from IOC membership and the London 2012 Olympic Games.”
9.If you could be any literary character for a day, who would you be?
I've been a huge fan of Top Chef since the very first season, so I knew I had to grab this book when I saw it at the library. Simmons' writes in a very down-to-earth manner and includes a bunch of the recipes she raves about in the chapters. I probably won't actually make any of the recipes, but I was glad they were there in case I was feeling adventurous!
Mitchell: “I had the advantage, or disadvantage, as the case may be, of watching Mitt Romney and Newt Gingrich at the same time on side-by-side screens. It’s my job; someone has to do it.”
There's good news here, though - this is a beer review, so we can pretend none of that just happened.
Yaya Chique, Design House for "debi lynn designs" is now ONLY my showroom & studio and will only be open to the public for special events.
To make this life feel new.
When has legislation in this country been dependent upon the affection the populace has for its president? Was not the formation of legislation assigned to the body of government most representative of the population?
“No,” answered Violet tersely. “She won’t.”
Loosestrife was once widely used as a medicinal herb, but it has become less popular in modern times. The different species have various medicinal uses.
For the puppy – petting always does the trick. For your gaby – hugs, lots of verbal encouragement, and kisses. For your drag queen – a wig-spree. Once a week, if your drag queen is behaving, take her out on a wig-spree where she can purchase any wig she wants up to $100. Yes, it is costly, but in the end very effective.
This is where it gets interesting (and hideous).
Well it’s March and mommy has been super busy with school and me! Finally she decided to update my blog! So here is what I’ve been up to lately!
The recipe calls for a 10 inch round cake pan with three inch sides. I couldn’t find one in Williams Sonoma when I was at the Mall of America the last time, so I started looking online for ideas. I came across a video from Chef Marcela Valladolid from Food Network, where she made basically the same cake in a Bundt pan. Excellent idea!
Some dogs with hip dysplasia do well with weight control and pain medication as they get older. As mentioned in a previous Pet Points article, pain drugs should be given only with precautions. Human drugs can be dangerous when given to animals. Also, side effects can include irritation to both the stomach and intestine or liver and kidney damage. Blood testing is required prior to starting medication and monitoring is necessary when using pain medication.
P: Pushy-Yes I can admit that I’m pushy when I really want something!
On April 19th 2012 I attended International trade Seminar at WORLD CHAMER OF COMMERCE at 200 Peachtree. The founder of the Chamber is Solange Warner – an amazingly strong and visionary woman who cares most about standing up against human traffic.
Caves. Bungalows. Light houses. Cages. All have made appearances on former episodes, and all would send me into a full-on, can’t-breathe-must-die-now panic attack.
The kids and I often feeling like we were in trouble, never knowing if he loved us that day.
-charcoal
DAP Johor Chairman Boo Cheng Hao only knows how to play political tricks and talk nonsense, and has underestimated the wisdom of the voters by continuing to use the same tricks in an attempt to fool the voters.
Third, to get a really soft, satiny look on up close shots of the dog, such as the one below, try setting a small aperture (in this case f/16), high shutter speed (1/1000). The ISO was 2000. The result is the camera does not have as much data to work with, so the pixels are softened. Personally, I love the satiny look of the dog’s fur.
In short she is not the kind of young woman who might naturally be associated with Britain's spiralling binge-drinking youth culture.
*Incidentally, my parents' first car that I can actually remember was a 1975 Gran Torino. It was white, with leg-burning dark blue vinyl seats. It was also adorned with a "George Brett for President" bumper sticker, distributed during his MVP-winning 1980 season when he hit .390.
… and the newest privileged gay shill for the ‘Oh, we told you that if you played nice and let us get our ENDA we’d come back and add you to it but now we’re just going to forget about ENDA and concentrate on other gay-only stuff, HA! HA!’ agenda to be allowed to poison the equality well via the Washington Blade:
Have a great week!!!!!!
Dialogue: 6,0:00:38.85,0:00:43.52,Default,,0000,0000,0000,,Though, I would call that a pretty sad way to live.
In truth, the blood intoxicates psyches -
I know the 365 is now over, but I STILL give you all BIG baking hugs and muffins!! xoxoxox
Spellman Files series by Lisa Lutz--read 3 out of 5 (series ongoing?) A woman named Isabel deals with her family of San Francisco private investigators.
Ownership : Google, Manufacturers
Religion is about devotion. Reverence. Worship. Religion can morph into a series of moral checks and the like, but to keep it simple, religion is about these basic concepts. It’s about belief and faith. As a polytheist, my religion is also about the gods.
“Strains on families.
56. Brown Liquor -- John Anderson
I thought perhaps a piano.
Away to the window I flew like a flash,
we dream
Yes it is rare to find a full British menu in Australia. So this is an absolute delight to the Aussie pallette.
Suitably impressed, the trainer said he believed this dog could be trained to find drugs, bombs, bodies, anything.
*Which is, of course, precisely why I started The Potty Diaries nearly 5 years ago - to find the funny side in stuff that would otherwise drive me crazy...
stayed at. It would be interesting to see the staff side of the
well.... somehow we missed our train, so we had to wait for another bit.
Which is why I forgot the very thing that made me write the SINCE I BECAME A MOM post, the one thing that triggered my mind into thinking about all the things that have changed...it just flew right out of my head. And believe it or not, wine did not have anything to do with me forgetting...this time. =)
What I say to end the conversation: It IS a scary thing to think you are going to get pregnant right away and then it doesn’t happen.
In unrelated news, I’ve been working on a small SHMUP-like video game for the past few weeks and I decided to throw together a quick demo video for it. I couldn’t find my Adobe Premiere CD, so I had an interesting time just trying to sync things up in Windows Movie Maker. Still, I had more luck with WMM than with Camtasia Studio (which I find terrible), so I can’t hate on it too much.
"It's not like being on the dole,
I plan to take all the kids up to see her on Sunday and bring her some gifts. I hope that will raise her spirits some and I hope she's got to eat by then as well. Overall I would say she's doing well on adjusting, I just wish things could go back to what they used to be. I know it can't/won't happen but I can pray.
22. Household Dust: A Harmless Natural Occurrence Only Women Notice
O’REILLY FW, STEVENS AB. Sickness absence due to influenza. Occup Med 2002; 52: 265-269.
* A mother is not a person to lean on, but a person to make leaning unnecessary.Dorothy Canfield Fisher
The Last Word is an easy and delightful book to read. Benn does a great job of drawing the reader into the story, helping us to see ourselves in the disciples and in turn, points us to the comforting last words of Jesus as the source of life. This book would be a great devotional and with the study questions in the back it would make for a helpful Bible study guide for a small group. This is the kind of book every Christian can benefit from as they dive into the final words of Jesus.
Tell potential suitor that you...
